RESEARCH ARTICLE
CORRESPONDING AUTHOR:
Yannik Paul
Christian-Albrechts-University 
of Kiel, Germany
paul@psychologie.uni-kiel.de
KEYWORDS:
Intolerance of Uncertainty; 
Decision-making; Information 
sampling; Description-
Experience Gap; Loss Aversion; 
Probability Weighting
TO CITE THIS ARTICLE:
Paul, Y., Pedersen, A., & 
Fuławka, K. (2025). 
Decomposing Intolerance of 
Uncertainty: No Association 
With Affective Decision Making 
in a Community Sample. 
Computational Psychiatry, 9(1), 
pp. 210–230. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.5334/cpsy.140
Decomposing Intolerance of 
Uncertainty: No Association 
With Affective Decision 
Making in a Community 
Sample
YANNIK PAUL 
ANYA PEDERSEN 
KAMIL FUŁAWKA 
*Author affiliations can be found in the back matter of this article
ABSTRACT
Intolerance of Uncertainty (IU) is a transdiagnostic factor in psychological disorders, 
yet its underlying psychological mechanisms remain unclear. To close this gap, we 
first identify three potential mechanisms from existing definitions of IU: (1) negativity 
overweighting, (2) pr obability distortion, and (3) information deficit aversion. Second, we 
demonstrate how these mechanisms map onto well-established preference patterns in 
decision making under uncertainty as captured by Cumulative Prospect Theory: (1) loss 
aversion, (2) nonlinear probability weighting, and (3) the description–experience (DE) gap. 
Third, we conduct an affective decision-making experiment to investigate the relationship 
between self-reported IU and these preference patterns, as measured with individually 
estimated parameters of cumulative prospect theory. In the study, 100 participants made 
120 choices between hypothetical painkillers with different probabilistic side effects. 
Half of the choices were made in a description condition, where all information was 
provided upfront; the other half in an experience condition, where participants acquired 
information through sampling. Trait IU was measured with a questionnaire. Participants 
overweighed side effects relative to treatment benefits (loss aversion), overestimated 
the probability of unlikely negative outcomes (increased nonlinear probability weighting), 
and their probability weighting patterns differed between the experimental conditions 
(DE gap). However, their preference patterns did not correlate with IU scores. Possible 
explanations are that the task did not effectively establish an affective context with real 
consequences for behavior, or that disorder-specific processes were not captured in our 
community sample. These findings highlight the need for a precise definition of IU and 
suggest avenues for designing tasks that enable a better understanding of IU.
211
Paul et al.  
Computational Psychiatry  
DOI: 10.5334/cpsy.1401 INTRODUCTION
To function effectively in a complex world, individuals must constantly make decisions, often 
under conditions of uncertainty. For example, outcomes may be probabilistic, such as when people 
invest on the stock market, or relevant information may be missing, such as when people decide 
between medical treatments without knowing all the potential side effects and their likelihoods 
(Bradley & Drechsler, 2013; Carleton, 2016a, 2016b; Rowe, 1994).
Individual differences in intolerance of uncertainty (IU) — that is, in how people react cognitively, 
emotionally, and behaviorally to uncertainty (Freeston et al., 1994) — have been studied extensively 
in clinical psychology. Originating from research on generalized anxiety disorder (Shihata et al., 2016), 
IU has emerged as a transdiagnostic risk factor for a range of mental health disorders (Gentes & 
Ruscio, 2011; Holaway, Heimberg & Coles, 2006; McEvoy & Mahoney, 2013; Vander Haegen, Etienne 
& Duregger, 2016). It is associated with disorder-specific symptoms, such as intrusive thoughts in 
obsessive-compulsive disorder and panic attacks in panic disorder (Gentes & Ruscio, 2011; McEvoy & 
Mahoney, 2012), can be alleviated through standard treatments for these disorders (Wilson, Abbott 
& Norton, 2023), and is related to other transdiagnostic constructs like repetitive negative thinking 
or ineffective emotion regulation (McEvoy & Mahoney, 2013; Sahib et al., 2023). It is also observed in 
subclinical expressions in undergraduate and community samples (Bottesi et al., 2016; Bottesi et al., 
2019; Ouellet et al., 2019). With research increasingly emphasizing the need for treatment approaches 
that specifically target IU (Einstein, 2014; McEvoy & Erceg-Hurn, 2016), it is crucial to understand the 
psychological mechanisms behind it (McEvoy & Erceg-Hurn, 2016; Starcevic & Berle, 2006).
Most research on IU has focused on associations between self-report measures of IU and other self-
report measures. This approach, while valuable for establishing the construct’s clinical relevance, 
fails to shed light on the psychological mechanisms underlying IU. This would require observing 
concrete behavior in situations involving uncertainty. Although IU has been linked to associative 
learning of threat and safety (Morriss, Christakou & van Reekum, 2016; Morriss et al., 2019), this work 
primarily targets low-level contingency learning and may not capture the more complex decisions 
often described in IU theory. In these later stages of decision making (Bach & Dolan, 2012), evidence 
on how IU influences behavior remains inconclusive (Carleton et al., 2016; O’Bryan et al., 2021 ), 
with some studies finding reliably associations of behavior and self-reported IU (Ladouceur, Talbot 
& Dugas, 1997; Jacoby et al., 2014) and others finding only small or no associations (Carleton et al., 
2016; Morein-Zamir et al., 2020). Several authors have noted that more specific and nuanced methods 
are needed to capture behavior under IU and that, in general, a more mechanistic perspective on 
IU is required (Carleton et al., 2016; Cobos et al., 2024; O’Bryan et al., 2021; Sandhu, Xiao & Lawson, 
2023). Key challenges include inconsistency in definitions of IU (Starcevic & Berle, 2006), including 
the definitions of uncertainty itself, difficulties in operationalizing and predicting specific behavioral 
responses (Carleton et al., 2016; O’Bryan et al., 2021), and challenges in conceptualizing the role of 
affect and threat in IU-related behavior (Jacoby et al., 2016; O’Bryan et al., 2021; Ouellet et al., 2019).
In this study, we investigate how IU, as measured by questionnaires, corresponds to behavior 
under uncertainty, as measured by a decision task. Although uncertainty has been conceptualized 
in various ways across different fields (Bach & Dolan, 2012; Bland & Schaefer, 2012), we argue that 
decision tasks are best suited to operationalize situations hypothesized by the IU literature. To this 
end, we first identify three distinct psychological mechanisms from commonly used definitions 
of IU. Second, we introduce cumulative prospect theory (CPT), a framework used in decision 
science to measure and describe choice behavior under uncertainty, and illustrate how the three 
psychological mechanisms identified can be mapped onto constructs within this framework. 
Finally, we develop an experimental paradigm that integrates insights from past research to test 
hypotheses derived from the CPT framework.
1.1 DIFFERENT DEFINITIONS OF IU LEAD TO DIFFERENT PREDICTIONS ABOUT 
BEHAVIOR
We propose that the psychological mechanisms implied by the various definitions of IU can 
be synthesized into three mechanisms: (1) negativity overweighting, (2) probability distortion, 
212
Paul et al.  
Computational Psychiatry  
DOI: 10.5334/cpsy.140and (3) information deficit aversion (see Table 1; for a related overview, see Carleton, 2012). To 
illustrate, consider the example of planning a mountain hike when the weather forecast predicts 
a 5% chance of a storm. A definition focusing on negativity overweighting would predict that a 
person with high IU might find the small prospect of getting cold and wet so off-putting that they 
decide not go at all. A definition focusing on probability distortion would suggest that a high-IU 
individual will overweight the probability of a storm and likewise decide to stay safe at home. A 
definition focusing on information deficit aversion would imply that a high-IU individual would 
worry about not knowing, for example, the exact timing of the storm. They might either seek out 
more information or decide not to set off either.
These psychological mechanisms correspond to psychological mechanisms assumed in 
Cumulative Prospect Theory (CPT), one of the most prominent formal models of choice under risk 
and uncertainty (Tversky & Kahneman, 1992 ), being widely used in both economic and medical 
contexts (Schwartz, Goldberg & Hazen, 2008 ; Verma, Razak & Detsky, 2014 ). Next, we illustrate 
how decision science and CPT provide a framework for measuring choice behavior that can be 
leveraged to investigate how IU shapes decision making under uncertainty. To this end, we discuss 
the mapping between CPT and the psychological mechanisms underlying IU (see Figure 1 for a 
graphical representation).
Table 1 Common definitions 
of IU and the implied 
psychological mechanism.
PSYCHOLOGICAL 
MECHANISM
EXAMPLE DEFINITION RELEVANT CITATIONS
1 Negativity 
overweighting
“[…] tendency of an individual to consider it 
unacceptable that a negative event may occur, 
however small the probability of its occurrence” 
(Dugas, Gosselin & Ladouceur, 2001)
(Arditte Hall & Arditte, 2024; 
Bredemeier & Berenbaum, 2008; 
Deschenes et al., 2010; Dugas et al., 
2005; Morriss et al., 2022)
2 Probability 
distortion
“[…] tendency to overestimate the chance 
of and be unwilling to accept potential, but 
unlikely, negative outcomes in uncertain 
situations […]” (Donthula et al., 2020)
(Deschenes et al., 2010; Dugas, Buhr 
& Ladouceur, 2004; Gosselin et al., 
2008; Luhmann, Ishida & Hajcak, 
2011; Milne, Lomax & Freeston, 
2019; Reuman et al., 2015)
3 Information 
deficit aversion
“[…] individual’s dispositional incapacity to 
endure the aversive response triggered by the 
perceived absence of salient, key, or sufficient 
information, and sustained by the associated 
perception of uncertainty” (Carleton, 2016b)
(Carleton, 2016a; Freeston & Komes, 
2023; Grenier, Barrette & Ladouceur, 
2005; Ladouceur, Talbot & Dugas, 
1997; Milne, Lomax & Freeston, 2019; 
Pepperdine, Lomax & Freeston, 2018)
Figure 1 Cumulative prospect 
theory and the psychological 
mechanisms underlying 
Intolerance of Uncertainty. 
A) Negativity overweighting 
can be captured in CPT by loss 
aversion, measured with the 
λ parameter, B) probability 
distortion can be captured 
in CPT by the shape of the 
nonlinear probability weighting 
function, measured with the 
γ parameter, C) information 
deficit aversion aligns with 
the Description–Experience 
gap (DE gap), which can 
be captured in CPT by the 
difference in probability 
weighting between decisions 
from description and decisions 
from experience. Depending 
on task structure and analysis 
strategy, probability weighting 
in decisions from experience 
can over- or underweight 
probabilities.

213
Paul et al.  
Computational Psychiatry  
DOI: 10.5334/cpsy.1401.2 DECISION MAKING UNDER RISK AND UNCERTAINTY
Clinical research on IU rarely distinguishes between different forms of uncertainty and risk. 
Decision science, in contrast, clearly differentiates between certainty, uncertainty, and risk 
(Mousavi & Gigerenzer, 2014 ). C ertainty refers to situations where outcomes occur with 100% 
probability. Under risk, outcomes are known and probabilistic, and their probabilities are known. 
Under uncertainty, outcomes are known and probabilistic, but their probabilities are unknown. 
Over the decades, decision science has identified a number of regularities in how people make 
choices under risk and uncertainty, often by investigating choices involving monetary lotteries (see 
Keller, 1992, for examples).
A monetary lottery consists of a set of probabilistic outcomes, for example, an 80% chance of 
winning $100 (gains) versus a 20% chance of losing $200 (losses). In a standard decision task, 
participants make multiple choices between carefully designed pairs of lotteries, typically revealing 
consistent preference patterns (e.g., overweighting certain outcomes or changing preferences 
the same problem scaled differently). The observed preference patterns have motivated the 
development of formal models of risky choice, including CPT (Tversky & Kahneman, 1992). CPT uses 
nonlinear functions to transform objective outcomes and probabilities into nonlinear subjective 
representations. The functions were designed to capture the most commonly observed preference 
patterns and are assumed to reflect distinct psychological mechanisms. The free parameters of 
these functions, estimated separately for each individual, serve as indirect measures of the assumed 
underlying psychological mechanisms, therefore summarizing the aforementioned preference 
patterns in these parameters. In this study, we focus on three well-researched preference patterns: 
loss aversion, nonlinear probability weighting (Tversky & Kahneman, 1992 ), and the description–
experience gap (DE gap) (Hertwig et al., 2004 ; Hertwig & Erev, 2009 ). We now introduce these 
preference patterns, demonstrate how they are captured in CPT via parameters and discuss how 
they relate to the proposed psychological mechanisms of IU (see Figure 1 for an overview).
Loss aversion describes the tendency for individuals to be more sensitive to potential losses than to 
potential gains (Tversky & Kahneman, 1991). In a classic example, Tversky and Kahneman (1992) 
found that participants required a potential gain of at least $202 at 50% probability to offset a 
potential loss of $100 at the same probability. In other words, on average, monetary losses seem 
about twice as impactful as equivalent monetary gains. In CPT, individual levels of loss aversion 
are represented by the value function, and the λ parameter determines how much losses are 
overweighed relative to gains. Increased values in λ above one would lead to a preference pattern 
where losses avoided even though equal gains would be available. Loss aversion corresponds to 
the first psychological mechanism of IU, negativity overweighting (Table 1), where the negative 
outcome itself triggers IU-related processes (see Figure 1a).
Nonlinear probability weighting describes how people tend to choose between monetary lotteries 
as if they were overweighting small probabilities and underweighting large probabilities (Kahneman 
& Tversky, 1979; Tversky & Kahneman, 1992). For example, in Kahneman and Tversky (1979), 83% 
of participants preferred a 100% chance to lose $5 over a 0.1% chance to lose $5000 despite 
the statistical equivalence of both options. This example illustrates how small probabilities are 
overweight relative to their objective value. This phenomenon aligns with the second psychological 
mechanism of IU, probability distortion, which involves cognitive biases in processing small and 
large probabilities. Specifically, it refers to the tendency to overweight the small probabilities of 
unlikely outcomes and to underweight large probabilities (see Figure 1b). Values lower than one 
in γ would lead to a preference pattern where rare events have more impact on decisions, for 
example avoiding an impactful but very unlikely loss. In CPT, individual differences in nonlinear 
probability weighting are represented by the probability weighting function. As γ approaches 1, the 
probability weighting function becomes more linear, thus probability sensitivity increases. When 
γ diverges from 1, and approaches 0 or infinity, the function becomes more inverted S-shape or 
S-shape, respectively.
The description–experience gap (DE gap) refers to reversals in preferences between choices made 
under risk and uncertainty (Hertwig & Erev, 2009). In choices under risk, participants are given all 
214
Paul et al.  
Computational Psychiatry  
DOI: 10.5334/cpsy.140relevant information about a lottery’s outcomes and their probabilities in text form (i.e., description 
condition). In choices under uncertainty, lotteries are presented in the form of interactive 
“buttons”—participants click on the buttons to sample outcomes from the respective option 
according to the coded probabilities. By sampling from the lottery many times (i.e., experiencing 
it), participants can discover the available outcomes and estimate their probabilities based on how 
often they occur. One well-known preference reversal pattern is that, in the description condition, 
most people prefer $3 for 100% (sure option) to $4 with 80% and $0 otherwise (risky option). 
However, when given the chance to “experience” both lotteries through simulations, most people 
prefer the risky option. Initially, it was thought that the DE gap was caused by the underweighting 
of rare events and recency effects (Hertwig et al., 2004 ). Underweighting of rare events occurs 
because people usually take relatively few samples in the experience condition, resulting in biased 
representation of rare events. Recency effects arise when more recent outcomes have a stronger 
influence on choice behavior than do earlier ones. However, a recent meta-analysis showed that 
the DE gap holds even when the experienced probabilities match the described ones, and that 
recency effects likely reflect strategic sampling termination (Wulff, Mergenthaler-Canseco & 
Hertwig, 2018). Thus, the exact cause of the DE gap remains an open question.
Nevertheless, the DE gap is inherently linked to choice behavior under incomplete information, 
which closely aligns with the third potential psychological mechanism—information deficit 
aversion (see Figure 1c). The DE gap can be measured in various ways (Wulff, Mergenthaler-
Canseco & Hertwig, 2018); here, we compare individual probability weighting functions estimated 
separately for the same choices made twice: Once under a description condition and once under 
an experience condition. This approach has been successful in other studies involving decision 
problems with two risky alternatives (e.g., Glöckner et al., 2016; Kellen, Pachur & Hertwig, 2016). It 
highlights the different ways individuals use probability information in these two modes of decision 
making (Hau et al., 2008 ). A simpler way to measure the DE gap is by looking at the proportion 
of preference reversals, as described in the previous paragraph. Finally, given that IU has been 
linked to information gathering (Jacoby et al., 2016), it is reasonable to also expect behavior in the 
experience condition to be linked to information deficit aversion. Thus, both probability weighting 
in the experience condition and sampling behavior are also metrics of interest.
Despite the parallels between IU and these three well-established preference patterns in decision 
making, no previous studies have, to our knowledge, empirically examined these relationships. 
Studying the relations between the preference patterns and IU could provide insights into the 
validity of different IU definitions, and help determine which psychological mechanisms best 
represent IU as measured by self-reports. Previous attempts to link choice behavior with IU have 
produced inconsistent results (Carleton et al., 2016; O’Bryan et al., 2021). In the next section, we 
analyze these findings to identify potential reasons for the inconsistencies. Our aim is to guide the 
development of an ecologically and theoretically robust task within the frameworks of behavioral 
decision science and CPT.
1.3 PAST ATTEMPTS AT OPERATIONALIZING IU
Various paradigms have been used to operationalize uncertainty-related behavior (Carleton et al., 
2016). One of the most popular tasks to operationalize outcome uncertainty in decision making 
behavior (Bach & Dolan, 2012) is the beads task (Huq, Garety & Hemsley, 1988), where participants 
infer the ratio of black and white beads in a container by drawing a series of random beads from 
it. Participants continue drawing samples until they feel ready to decide. Outcomes are behavioral 
measures like the number of draws to decision, decision time, and task performance, as well as 
negative affect and state uncertainty during and after the task (O’Bryan et al., 2021 ). However, 
findings on the relationship between decision behavior in the beads task and IU are mixed. Some 
studies have shown associations with IU or constructs close to IU (Jacoby et al., 2014; Ladouceur, 
Talbot & Dugas, 1997); other studies have failed to replicate these findings (Jacoby et al., 2016 ; 
Morein-Zamir et al., 2020 ; Osmanağaoğlu et al., 2021 ). Studies using different paradigms have 
found small, if any, relationships between concrete decision behavior and IU (Carleton et al., 
2016; Cobos et al., 2024 ; Morriss, Christakou & van Reekum, 2016; O’Bryan et al., 2021 ). In two 
215
Paul et al.  
Computational Psychiatry  
DOI: 10.5334/cpsy.140seminal studies, risk aversion but not loss aversion was associated with GAD, anxiety and worry 
(Charpentier et al., 2017; Sporrer et al., 2024), which indicate that the psychological mechanisms 
captured by CPT might also play a role in IU.
It has been suggested that several factors may affect how IU shapes behavior, namely, perceived 
threat, negative affect during and after the task, as well as the affective context of the task itself 
(Carleton et al., 2016; Jacoby et al., 2016; O’Bryan et al., 2021). Supporting this, models of IU suggest 
that uncertainty, especially when it relates to a potentially aversive event, triggers a negative 
emotional response (Anderson et al., 2019; Carleton et al., 2012; Einstein, 2014). The degree of this 
negative affect varies with individual levels of IU. When these negative emotions are not regulated 
adaptively, more maladaptive coping strategies and reactions emerge (Sahib et al., 2023). These 
maladaptive coping mechanisms can manifest as approach behaviors (e.g., checking, information 
gathering, worry) or avoidance behaviors (e.g., decision paralysis, safety behaviors) (Birrell et al., 
2011; Sahib et al., 2023 ). In summary, theoretical considerations and empirical findings suggest 
that the affective aspects and contexts of IU are important for understanding the mechanisms by 
which IU affects behavior.
1.4 SUMMARY OF RESEARCH GOALS
In this study, we aim to uncover the psychological mechanisms underlying IU by using a paradigm 
that captures decisions made under risk and uncertainty. We identify three psychological 
mechanisms potentially underlying IU: negativity aversion, probability distortion, and information 
deficit aversion. These categories map closely to preference patterns captured in CPT: loss aversion, 
nonlinear probability weighting, and the DE gap. A review of theoretical accounts and previous 
efforts to operationalize IU-related choice behavior emphasizes the critical role of affect and 
context. The primary objective of this study is to identify which preference patterns, as measured by 
CPT, correlate best with self-reported IU, enabling us to evaluate which psychological mechanisms 
best represent the concept of IU. To this end, we employ a correlational design, and a decision 
task focused on affective outcomes rather than monetary lotteries. Specifically, the task involves 
medical decisions between hypothetical medications (similar to the approaches taken in Lejarraga 
et al., 2016; Pachur, Hertwig & Wolkewitz, 2014; Suter, Pachur & Hertwig, 2016). In summary, this 
study aims to investigate which psychological mechanisms of decision making under uncertainty 
are associated with IU as assessed through self-report measures.
2 METHODS
The Study was preregistered on AsPredicted (#176194, aspredicted.org/8bvq-48vh.pdf). The study 
was conducted in German.
2.1 PARTICIPANTS
We recruited 101 participants via the Prolific Platform. Due to a technical error, this exceeded 
the intended sample size by one. Participants were required to be at least 18 years old, reside 
in Germany, and speak German fluently, as specified by filters on Prolific. To ensure data quality, 
participants needed a minimum approval rate of 90%–100% on the platform. One participant 
was excluded based on preregistered criteria because they did not sample at all in the experience 
condition, resulting in a final sample of 100 participants (51 female, 49 male; mean age = 31 
years, SD = 9). The median completion time was 43 minutes. Participants received a remuneration 
of £9. Informed consent was obtained from all participants after they had read detailed study 
information, including goals, procedures, data handling, remuneration on Prolific and GDPR rights.
2.2 ETHICS
The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board (Ethics Committee) of the Max-Planck 
Institute for Human Development and was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of 
Helsinki.
216
Paul et al.  
Computational Psychiatry  
DOI: 10.5334/cpsy.1402.3 PROCEDURE
The study consisted of three main parts. After a brief introduction, participants first completed 
questionnaire measures. Second, they completed the affective decision task in two conditions 
(experience and description), with the order of conditions randomized. Third, participants 
completed the affect rating task, so that complete information about all side effects and pain 
scenarios would not interfere with the decision tasks. Finally, they were debriefed and redirected 
to Prolific for remuneration.
2.4 MATERIALS
2.4.1 Questionnaire measures
We used the German version of the Intolerance of Uncertainty Scale-18 (IUS-18) to assess trait IU 
(Buhr & Dugas, 2002; Gerlach, Andor & Patzelt, 2008). The German version consists of 18 items with 
a factor structure differing from the original IUS, measuring the factors “Impaired ability to act 
under IU,” “Distress under IU,” and “Vigilance under IU.” A total score can also be calculated. Items 
were rated on a 5-point Likert scale from “not true” to “completely true”. Emotion regulation, an 
important covariate of IU, was measured using the German version of the Difficulties in Emotion 
Regulation Scale (DERS) (Gratz & Roemer, 2004; Gutzweiler & In-Albon, 2018; Ehring et al., 2013), 
which consists of 36 items rated on a 5-point Likert scale from “almost never” to “almost always”. 
Both questionnaires were implemented using the survey software LimeSurvey.
2.4.2 Affective decision task
We employed an affective decision-making paradigm implemented in PsychoPy on the Pavlovia 
Platform (Peirce et al., 2019 ). The tasks involved choosing between two different painkillers for 
hypothetical pain scenarios, resembling prior tasks from the literature (Fulawka & Pachur, 2022 ; 
Suter, Pachur & Hertwig, 2016). All participants completed this decision-making paradigm in two 
conditions: A description condition, where all information (treatment success rate; side effects 
and their likelihood) was provided upfront, and an experience condition, where the information 
was not provided, but the participant had to infer it via sampling from a distribution mirroring the 
information displayed in the description condition. Each decision problem was characterized by 
a hypothetical pain scenario, described by its location and intensity, and two painkiller options. 
Each painkiller option differed in its treatment success rate (50%–95%), side effect and side effect 
likelihood (1%–30%). In both conditions, participants were instructed to imagine they suffer from 
the specified pain and to choose which painkiller they would prefer under such circumstances.
In the description condition (see Figure 2a), all information about painkillers was provided to the 
participant. Participants were free to consider both options and review the information provided 
without time constraints. Once they selected either option A or B, no further feedback was 
displayed and the subsequent trial was presented.
In the experience condition (see Figure 2b), no information about the painkillers was presented 
initially. Instead, participants could sample outcomes by clicking on visual representations of 
the painkillers. Each click simulated a single trial of medication use, yielding binary feedback on 
treatment success and side-effect occurrence. These outcomes were probabilistically determined 
based on the same parameters used in the description condition but remained undisclosed. 
Through repeated sampling, participants could estimate the underlying probabilities to inform their 
choice. Sampling was unconstrained in duration and frequency, allowing participants to gather as 
much information as they deemed necessary prior to making a decision. After the decision, no 
further feedback was provided and the subsequent trial began. A computerized tutorial preceded 
the task to ensure comprehension of the sampling procedure and task structure.
Each condition consisted of 60 choice problems. Pain locations and intensity were informed by 
common clinical classification categories (Baeyer et al., 2011; Bijur, Latimer & Gallagher, 2003 ); 
side effects were taken from Suter, Pachur & Hertwig (2016). In total, 10 unique pain location-
intensity pairs and 10 unique side-effects were included in the problem set (for details see Tables 
SI4-SI6). The intensity ratings of side effects and pains used to construct the problem were 
217
Paul et al.  
Computational Psychiatry  
DOI: 10.5334/cpsy.140
obtained by a small pilot study using only the affect rating task, additionally we report rating 
data from the present study in Figure SI4 and SI5 in the supplement. Order of choice problems 
and option locations on screen were randomized within conditions. For both tasks, we recorded 
choices and decision times. In the experience condition, we also recorded each sample and its 
corresponding timestamp within the trial.
2.4.3 Affect rating task
Participants provided an affect rating for each outcome (i.e., each pain and side effect) presented 
in the affective decision task. First, they rated each pain on the distress it would cause them on a 
10-point Likert scale, ranging from “not at all distressed” to “extremely distressed.” Second, they 
rated each side effect on the same scale.
2.5 ANALYTICAL APPROACH
2.5.1 Data processing
Data preprocessing involved several steps to ensure the accuracy and consistency of the analysis. 
For questionnaires, total questionnaire scores were calculated by summing the individual item 
scores, after reverse scoring inverted items.
For the experience condition of the affective decision task, we calculated multiple metrics related 
to sampling behavior. First, the median number of samples was calculated trial-wise for each 
participant. Second, we quantified participants’ switching behavior between medication A and 
B during sampling. For each trial, relative switching was computed as the number of observed 
switches divided by the maximum possible number of switches, given the total number of samples. 
Figure 2 Affective decision 
task. A) Schematic screen 
in the description condition. 
Participants choose medication 
A or B, based on the provided 
descriptions of consequences, 
by clicking the respective 
button. B) Schematic screen 
in the experience condition. 
Participants click on the boxes 
to “experience” possible the 
consequences (i.e. sample 
from) for each medication. In 
this example, the participant 
sampled thrice, twice from 
medication A (with different 
outcomes), and once from 
medication B. Participants 
could sample as much as 
they wanted before making 
the decision. Note that no 
feedback was provided after 
choices in both conditions; each 
participant completed both 
versions of the task. C) After 
both tasks, participants rated 
pains and side effects for 
distress according to a ten-point 
Likert-scale.

218
Paul et al.  
Computational Psychiatry  
DOI: 10.5334/cpsy.140These trial-level values were then averaged across trials for each participant. All preprocessing and 
data visualization was done in R (R Core Team, 2022).
2.5.2 Estimation of prospect theory parameters
Participants’ choices in the affective decision task were modelled with Bayesian hierarchical 
implementation of CPT (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979 ; Tversky & Kahneman, 1992 ). In CPT, 
the subjective value of a choice option is given as the sum of all outcomes multiplied by their 
respective (transformed) probabilities. In our implementation, the subjective value of a painkiller A 
for participant i, denoted Vi,A was given with:
 () () () (),, , =+ , b sei A i b i seV va p va p  (1)
where ai,b = {1, …, 10} and ai,se = {–10, …, –1} are the individual’s i affect ratings of the pain that 
is to be treated, and of the painkiller’s side effect, respectively; the pb and pse are corresponding 
probabilities of these events.
The value function v(a) for the affect ratings has two different cases, depending on the input being 
side effects ai,se or benefits ai,b:
 ()
ìïïíïïî
,
,
, for ==, – , for =
ib
i i se
a aava a aaλ  (2)
Where the λi parameter is a captures individual’s i loss aversion — the overweighting of negative 
consequences (here: side effects) relative to gains (here: pains to be treated). With λi = 1, losses 
and gains are weighted equally. For λi > 1, side effects are overweighed relative to gains, indicating 
loss aversion.
The probability weighting function π(p) transforms objective probability values into decision 
weights. In the main analysis, we used the formulation developed by Prelec (1998):
 () ()()– –ln
=.
ip
pe
γ
π  (3)
The parameter γi captures the degree of an individual’s probability distortion.Values of γi < 1 
indicate overweighting of small probabilities and underweighting of the large ones, whereas 
γi = 1 indicates objective probability processing (i.e. no probability weighting). In the experience 
condition, instead of objective probabilities we used the individually experienced proportions of 
events (e.g., if sampling resulted in observing side effects occurrence in 2 out of 10 instances, 
the ratio 2/10 was used in modelling as event probability). Note that multiple forms for the 
weighting function were proposed (see Stott, 2006 ). In the supplement we show that the four 
most popular probability weighting functions (including Prelec’s) outperform the linear model 
(see Figure SI1) and that our main results do not depend on the specific choice of the weighting 
function (see Table SI3).
The probability of an individual i choosing the painkiller A over painkiller B, denoted P(A|{A, B}), was 
given by:
 {}  ,,
1( | , )= ,1 + exp(– ) –)(i iA iB
PA AB VV
 (4)
The parameter θi denotes a choice sensitivity parameter and captures to what extend the 
differences in subjective valuations of the painkillers map onto the choice probability. The 
parameter thus controls to what extent individual’s i choices align with CPT and is therefore 
strongly associated with model fit and psychological factors related to model fit. Within CPT, 
theta does not have a specific mechanistic role; we therefore report results concerning theta only 
in the supplement.
For each participant, the loss aversion λi, probability weighting γi, and choice sensitivity θi parameters 
were estimated separately for description ( λi,D, γi,D, θi,D) and experience conditions ( E, γi,E, θi,E). The 
219
Paul et al.  
Computational Psychiatry  
DOI: 10.5334/cpsy.140individual-level DE-gap was thus measured with the difference γi,D – γi,E in probability weighting 
between conditions.
In hierarchical models, the individual parameters are assumed to come from population-level 
distributions, with parameters of these distributions also estimated from the data. Here we 
assumed that each pair of individual parameters (e.g., γi,D and γi,E) comes from bivariate normal 
distributions. To efficiently implement the model in STAN language (Stan Development  Team, 
2024b), we used the non-centered parametrization and probit transformation of the individual 
parameters to assure that they stay in desired range. Specifically, using the individual parameter 
γi,D as an example, it was given with:
 () 
,,, = + ×,DiD iD Mγ γγ  (5)
Where the φ() function is the standard normal CDF, which maps real values into the [0,1] range 
and M is a scaling factor that sets the upper boundary of the individual parameter. In all analyses 
and for all parameters we set M = 5, allowing for relatively high levels of loss aversion for the λ 
parameters, and for the entire range of shapes for the probability weighting function governed 
by the γ parameter. The population-level mean μγ,D) of the individual parameters γi,D is obtained 
by applying the probit transformation and scaling factor to the mean component within the φ() 
function:   –1
,, (= )×DD Mγγ  — these are the values that we report in the results section.
The term  ,iDγ  is the individual i’s displacement from the population-level mean. We assumed 
that these displacements come from bivariate normal distributions for corresponding pairs of 
parameters between the experimental conditions:
 
æö éùæö éù ÷ç÷ ÷ç êúçêú÷ ÷ç ç÷ ÷êúç çêú÷ ÷÷ç çèø ÷êúçëûèø ëû
 
 
2
,,,
2
, ,,
0~, , 0
D DEiD
iE DE E
N
γγγ
γ γγ
 (6)
where 2
D and 2
E are the variances of individual-level displacement distributions in the description 
and experience conditions, respectively, and σγ,DE is the covariance. The multivariate binding of 
corresponding individual parameters allows for estimation of individual parameters in both 
conditions, while preserving the within-individual dependence of the parameters. In STAN, the 
estimation of the variance covariance matrix was done using optimization through Cholesky 
factorization (Stan Development Team, 2024b).
The model implementation has several advantages. First, it results in efficient and well converging 
procedure for estimating the posterior distributions of both individual and population-level 
parameters. Second, for all individual displacements and population mean parameters before 
probit transformation, we could use standard normal distributions, which after transformation 
with the φ() function resulted in uniform priors for the individual level parameters, not influencing 
the final shape of the prior distributions. For the correlation coefficient (in the variance-covariance 
matrix) we used weakly-informative Lewandowski-Kurowicka-Joe (LKJ) prior with parameter 
η = 4, which assumes that correlations of displacements between conditions to be most likely 
between –0.5 and 0.5. Thus, overall, the priors in the model were non- or weakly-informative and 
the estimation was most sensitive to the actual data.
To summarize, for the probability weighing parameter γ, the estimated parameters of interest 
were: the set of individual-level parameters for description and experience conditions, γi,D and γi,E 
respectively, the corresponding population-level means μγ,D and μγ,E, and the correlation between 
the individual-level parameters (estimated within the variance-covariance matrix) ργ,DE. The 
implementation for the estimation of the two other model parameters, namely loss aversion λ 
and choice sensitivity θ was analogous. Note that the Bayesian approach results in estimating 
posterior distributions of all model parameters, of which we report medians with 95% Bayesian 
credible intervals (95% BCI; the 2.5% and 97.5% quantiles).
The model was written in STAN programming language for statistical computing (Stan 
Development Team, 2024b) and estimated form R using the rstan-package (Stan Development 
220
Paul et al.  
Computational Psychiatry  
DOI: 10.5334/cpsy.140Team, 2024a). Posterior distributions of parameters were estimated using four chains, each with 
1,000 warm-up iterations and 4,000 subsequent samples, totaling 5,000 samples after discarding 
every other sample. The diagnostic plots and convergence statistics clearly (all R-hats < 1.01) 
indicated that the sampling procedure resulted in well-mixed chains. Parameter recovery was 
very good (see Figure 3c). Additionally, all posterior distributions were unimodal.
2.5.3 Statistical analyses
Bayesian nonparametric tests of Spearman’s ρ were used for correlation analysis (van Doorn et al., 
2020), with uniform uninformative beta priors. These non-parametric tests output a Bayes Factor 
(BF10) as a measure of evidence for the alternative hypothesis (BF 10 > 1), or the null hypothesis 
(BF10 < 1). Medians from individual parameter posteriors were used for correlational analysis and plots.
3 RESULTS
We first report descriptive statistics, demonstrating that the sample displayed meaningful choice 
patterns in both conditions of the task. Next, we present results from a posterior-predictive check 
that demonstrates the CPT model accurately captures these meaningful choice patterns as well 
as model fit and parameter recovery. After that, we describe sample characteristics with respect 
to loss aversion, nonlinear probability weighting, and the DE gap. Subsequently, we present results 
addressing our research question: Which psychological mechanisms of decision making under 
uncertainty are associated to IU as measured with self-reports?
3.1 DESCRIPTIVE ANALYSIS
As expected, IUS scores were highly correlated with DERS scores (ρ = 0.58, BF10 > 1000). IUS scores 
were concentrated in the lower half of the scale (M = 50.55, SD = 13.89, see Table 2). Correlations 
between IUS subscales ranged from 0.55 to 0.69. Correlations of IUS subscales with the DERS 
were between 0.33 and 0.65. Participants sampled on average 14.5 times, which is less often 
than in other studies using risky choice problems (Wulff, Mergenthaler-Canseco & Hertwig, 2018), 
but close to similar tasks in the medical decision domain (Lejarraga et al., 2016). Mean switching 
was low (M = 0.25, SD = 0.28), indicating that participants mostly sampled from one option before 
switching to the other and subsequently making a decision. In the description and experience 
conditions, participants chose the medication with the highest (described/experienced) weighted 
average of treatment probability and side effects in 65% and 75% of choices, respectively, and the 
option with the highest treatment success rate in 62% and 63% of choices, respectively. On the 
other hand, participants chose the option with the lowest weighted side effect in 61% of choices 
in the description condition, but in only 48% of choices in the experience condition. To check if the 
CPT model captures these behavioral patterns, we next analyze if the individual CPT parameters 
succeed in predicting these choice patterns.
3.2 MODEL FIT
Model fit is summarized in Figure 3. Overall, the model performed well in capturing participants’ 
choices. The approximate out-of-sample predictive accuracy of the model was 78% in the 
description condition and 81% in the experience condition (see Figure 3b). Our sample displayed 
meaningful choice patterns and use of strategies within both conditions of the experiment, for 
M SD MIN 25% 50% MEDIAN 75% MAX
IUS Total Score 50.55 13.89 22 42.75 50.00 61.25 83
IUS Impaired Ability 14.95 5.38 6 12.00 14.00 19.00 27
IUS Distress under IU 17.50 5.44 8 13.75 17.50 21.00 30
IUS Vigilance 18.10 5.11 6 15.00 18.00 21.00 29
DERS Total Score 93.34 23.53 42 77.75 94.00 113.00 142
Table 2 Descriptive statistics of 
the Intolerance of Uncertainty 
Scale (IUS), its subscales and 
the Difficulties in Emotion 
Regulation Scale (DERS).
221
Paul et al.  
Computational Psychiatry  
DOI: 10.5334/cpsy.140example preferring positive outcomes and minimizing probabilities of side effects. The model 
adequately captured these patterns (see Figure 3a). These strategies were not associated with the 
IUS (see supplement SI2).
3.3 MODELING RESULTS
An overview of the modeling results is presented in Figure 4. As Figure 4a shows, participants 
displayed loss aversion and nonlinear probability weighting in both conditions. Loss aversion 
was higher in the experience condition, μλ,e = 1.81,95% BCI: [1.52,2.13], than in the description 
condition, μλ,d = 1.41,95% BCI: [1.17,1.68], even though the BCI for the population-level difference 
distribution of λ in description and experience did marginally include 0, μλ,d – λ,e = –0.39,95% BCI: 
[–0.79,0.00]. Participants displayed a more linear probability weighting curve (e.g. decreased 
nonlinear probability weighting) in the experience condition, μγ,e = 0.71,95% BCI: [0.59,0.84], 
compared to the description condition, μγ,d = 0.43,95% BCI: [0.35,0.52] as indicated by γ values 
closer to one. This indicates that participants displayed increased probability sensitivity in the 
experience condition. In line with this, we found a negative DE gap, μGAP = –0.28,95% BCI: [–0.40,–
0.17] (see Figure 4c). As seen in Figure 4b, despite these expected patterns on the population 
level, there was reasonable variance in parameters on the individual level. For example, most 
of the sample displayed considerable loss aversion, although a small portion of participants 
also displayed the opposite trend, e.g. underweighting losses. Most of the probability weighting 
functions of participants were shaped in the inverted s-shape, however a small portion of 
participants displayed s-shaped probability weighting as well. More s-shaped probability weighting 
functions are present in the experience condition compared to the description condition. There 
was very strong evidence for a negative association of the median number of samples and the DE 
gap (ρ = −0.38, BF10 = 53.82). For an overview of parameter intercorrelation and choice strategies 
reported in Figure 3, we refer to the supplement (Figure SI2).
3.4 RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN IU AND DECISION PARAMETERS
Across all parameters in all conditions, we found moderate evidence for the null hypothesis that 
there was no correlation of the IUS score with parameters estimated from choice data (see Figure 5). 
Loss aversion (λ) was not associated with the IUS score in the description (ρ = 0.01, BF10 = 0.12) or the 
Figure 3 Summary of model fit. 
A) Posterior predictive checks 
for the CPT model. We defined 
several decision strategies 
participants may have used. 
For each strategy, we coded 
whether a participant’s choice 
aligned with the strategy, 
excluding trials where no 
optimal option could be 
determined. The proportion of 
observed choices consistent 
with each strategy is shown in 
black, and the model-predicted 
probability of choosing the 
rule-consistent option is shown 
in blue (description) or red 
(experience). Maximize expected 
value = Defined as deciding 
for the option with the highest 
sum of probability-weighted 
benefit and side effect; Minimize 
Side Effect = Defined as taking 
the option with the least 
intense side effect; Minimize 
Side Effect Prob. = Defined as 
taking the option with the least 
probable side effect; Maximize 
Treatment = Defined as taking 
the option with the best 
treatment probability. B) Model 
performance, quantified via 
LOO-based predictive accuracy. 
Using leave-one-out cross-
validation log-likelihoods, we 
computed predicted choice 
probabilities for each trial, 
converted these to binary 
predictions using a 0.5 threshold, 
and calculated accuracy as 
the proportion of correctly 
predicted choices per participant. 
Horizontal lines show mean 
accuracy for conditions. 
C) Parameter recovery of the 
model. Correlations between 
simulated and recovered 
parameters for description were 
r = 0.92 and r = 0.98 for λ and 
γ respectively. For experience, 
correlations were r = 0.93 and 
r = 0.93 for λ and γ. For details, 
refer to section 1.2 in the 
supplement.
222
Paul et al.  
Computational Psychiatry  
DOI: 10.5334/cpsy.140
Figure 4 Overview of modeling 
parameters. A) Comparison 
of individual estimates of 
loss aversion and nonlinear 
probability weighting (NPW) 
between the description and 
experience conditions, and 
the individual description–
experience gap (DE gap). 
B) Individual estimates of 
the value function and the 
probability weighting functions. 
The black curves represent 
the function of the median 
of the posterior estimates 
of the population-level 
parameters. C) Population-level 
probability weighting functions 
(i.e., medians of μγ,e and μγ,d 
estimates). D) Population-level 
posterior distribution of the DE 
gap. The individual estimates 
in A and B are the medians of 
the individual-level posterior 
distributions; the black lines 
show medians of corresponding 
population-level distributions.
Figure 5 Correlation Matrix 
of CPT Parameters and 
behavioral variables with the 
intolerance of uncertainty 
scale (IUS), its subscales and 
the DERS. Numbers represent 
the Spearman correlation, 
numbers in brackets BF10 for 
undirected Bayesian tests of 
these correlations. The λ gap 
is plotted for completeness. 
The discrete DE gap uses the 
discrete operationalization 
(i.e., proportion of preference 
reversals) from Wulff, 
Mergenthaler-Canseco & 
Hertwig (2018).
223
Paul et al.  
Computational Psychiatry  
DOI: 10.5334/cpsy.140experience condition (ρ = 0.02, BF10 = 0.12). Nonlinear probability weighting (γ) was not associated 
with the IUS score in the description (ρ = 0.02, BF10 = 0.12) or the experience condition (ρ = −0.02, 
BF10 = 0.13). Neither the DE gap (ρ = 0.08, BF10 = 0.14) nor median sampling (ρ = 0.02, BF10 = 0.12) 
was associated with the IUS score. We additionally tested the discrete operationalization of the DE 
gap often used in the literature: the proportion of preference reversals (e.g., Wulff, Mergenthaler-
Canseco & Hertwig, 2018). Here, a DE gap was identified when participants chose the painkiller with 
a less probable but worse side effect in the experience condition but rejected it in the description 
condition. Using this discrete operationalization did not change the results: There was still no 
association with the IUS score (ρ = 0.02, BF10 = 0.12). Additional analyses showed that there was no 
association with IUS subscales (see Figure 5).
4 DISCUSSION
Our study aimed to explore the relationship between IU and choice behavior under risk and 
uncertainty. To this end, we identified three mechanisms potentially underlying IU from commonly 
used definitions. We then showed how these categories align with preference patterns studied in 
behavioral decision science and can be operationalized using CPT parameters. Recognizing the 
importance of affect and threat, we developed an affective decision task with two versions: one 
measuring decisions under risk; the other decisions under uncertainty. Using CPT, we measured 
loss aversion, nonlinear probability weighting, and the DE gap, each corresponding to one of the 
hypothesized psychological mechanisms of IU.
We observed no relationships between self-reported IU and choice behavior, even though 
participants exhibited strong loss aversion and nonlinear probability weighting in both conditions, 
and there was evidence of a DE gap.
Our results reveal differences in participants’ decision-making behavior between the description 
and experience conditions, corresponding to decisions under risk versus decisions under uncertainty 
within the framework of decision science.
Findings from our affective decision task are consistent with previous results from the medical 
decision domain. Specifically, Lejarraga et al. (2016) reported lower nonlinear probability weighting 
in the experience condition than in the description condition of their medical task, while the 
probability weighting function retained its classic inverted S-shape. Although the level of nonlinear 
probability weighting was higher in their study than in ours, their task involved fewer decision 
problems, excluded gains, and included almost no rare outcomes. Our results differ, however, from 
studies on monetary choices between risky alternatives, which have reported either increased 
nonlinear probability weighting under experience (Glöckner et al., 2016; Kellen, Pachur & Hertwig, 
2016) or an S-shaped probability weighting function (Ungemach, Chater & Stewart, 2009). However, 
similar to other monetary decision studies, we found more expected value maximizations in the 
experience condition than in the description condition.
Consistent with Lejarraga et al. (2016), we observed a robust DE gap for medical decisions, even 
when gains and rare outcomes were included in the choice problems and although both options 
were risky (Wulff, Mergenthaler-Canseco & Hertwig, 2018). This suggests that affective decisions, 
as implemented in our task, differ qualitatively from monetary lottery choices. Affective outcomes 
appear to heighten the influence of uncertainty, resulting in more consistent preferences that 
are less affected by how choice problems are structured within decision tasks. Future research on 
choice behavior under IU should therefore carefully design tasks to ensure ecological validity and 
theoretical relevance by incorporating affective stimuli (e.g., Jacoby et al., 2016).
Although the study provided strong evidence that decision making is influenced by whether 
participants are dealing with risk or uncertainty, it did find moderate evidence against an 
association between choice behavior and questionnaire measures of IU. The absence of a clear 
link between IU and decision-making behavior could be due to several factors that warrant further 
exploration.
224
Paul et al.  
Computational Psychiatry  
DOI: 10.5334/cpsy.140Correlations between behavioral tasks and self-report measures are often weak, both generally 
(Dang, King, & Inzlicht, 2020) and specifically in the context of risk-taking (Mamerow, Frey, & Mata, 
2016). One explanation is that these methods capture different constructs and differ in reliability 
(Dang et al., 2020). Self-report tools like the IUS-18 assess stable traits, while behavioral tasks, such 
as the decision-making task used in this study, reflect momentary states and are more sensitive 
to situational influences. Although this methodological divergence limits the interpretation of 
our null results, prior research has linked IU to psychopathology (Gentes & Ruscio, 2011 ) and 
shown that decision-making tasks can capture core aspects of it (Charpentier et al., 2017; Sporrer 
et al., 2024). Therefore, limitations of both self-report measures and the behavioral task must be 
carefully considered when interpreting the present data.
Because the associations of IU and decision making represent trait-state associations, full 
usage of the spectrum of the self-report measures is needed to enable the detection of these 
associations beyond the differing scopes of constructs. Therefore, the limited range of IU scores in 
the present study may have contributed to the null findings. For the range of questionnaire scores, 
the composition of the sample is crucial: for the present study, participants were recruited through 
Prolific without clinical preselection. The sample should thus be regarded as a healthy community 
sample rather than a clinical one that displays IU values in the lower half of the scale. While IU 
has been shown to influence subclinical symptoms in the general population and undergraduate 
samples, its effects are most pronounced in patient samples with elevated IU levels with some 
research even suggesting distinct processes in healthy and patient samples or disorder-specific 
processes (Shihata, McEvoy & Mullan, 2017 ; Bottesi et al., 2019). Taken together, these points 
may have limited the study’s potential to detect meaningful associations or disorder-specific 
mechanisms and caused subtle but important variations in IU mechanisms to go undetected in 
our sample. Future research should employ tasks similar to the one used here to operationalize 
decisions under uncertainty in patient samples. Future versions of the task could also integrate 
disorder-specific facets of IU, tailoring the scenarios used in the task to disorder-specific topics 
that could yield additional insights into transdiagnostic and disorder-specific aspects of IU.
Another potential explanation for the absence of a relationship between IU and choice behavior 
is the limited ecological validity of our task, which may not have succeeded in creating an 
affective context with real consequences for behavior (Bredemeier & Berenbaum, 2008; 
Pepperdine, Lomax & Freeston, 2018 ; Reuman et al., 2015 ): The pain scenarios in our study 
were hypothetical and not actually experienced by participants. Future studies could focus 
on designing tasks with higher ecological validity, incorporating unpleasant stimuli, such as 
odors or mild electric shocks (von Helversen, Coppin & Scheibehenne, 2020 ; Stancak et al., 
2015). These paradigms could be adapted to introduce tangible consequences to decision-
making tasks like ours. Additionally, social situations, which are inherently uncertain, could be 
employed to establish environments that incorporate both uncertain outcomes and affective 
consequences (Vives & FeldmanHall, 2018 ). Additionally, experimental approaches could be 
employed to overcome the limitations of correlational designs. For instance, state-IU inductions 
can be used to create high- and low-IU groups in behavioral tasks (Britton & Davey, 2014 ; 
Mosca, Lauriola & Carleton, 2016 ).
We did not include direct comprehension checks in this study. Although such checks could have 
increased confidence in participants’ task performance and self-reports, our analysis of choice 
strategies and the posterior-predictive check indicate that most participants employed non-
random choice strategies, suggesting they understood the task. Moreover, participants recruited 
through the Prolific platform are generally known to provide high-quality data (Douglas, Ewell & 
Brauer, 2023).
Our study found moderate evidence of no association between IU and behavior, though changing 
the context from risk (where probabilities are known) to uncertainty (where they are not) did 
influence decision making. Future research should prioritize precise, theoretically informed 
definitions of IU and uncertainty, and use patient samples and experimental inductions to better 
capture the nuanced effects of IU on behavior.
225
Paul et al.  
Computational Psychiatry  
DOI: 10.5334/cpsy.140DATA ACCESSIBILITY STATEMENT
The codebase including the modeling Stan code and the data used for the analysis can be found 
here: https://github.com/y-paul/Decomposing_IU.
ADDITIONAL FILE
The additional file for this article can be found as follows:
•	 Supplementary Information. Supplemental Text, Supplemental Methods and Supplemental 
Tables. DOI: https://doi.org/10.5334/cpsy.140.s1
ETHICS AND CONSENT
This study was performed under strict adherence to the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki 
and was approved by Institutional Review Board (Ethics Committee) of the Max Planck Institute 
for Human Development.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Susannah Goss for editing the manuscript and Julia Sandach and Lilit 
Karapetyan for help with copyediting.
FUNDING INFORMATION
The Max Planck Society provided the funding for the data collection.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors have no competing interests to declare.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
YP contributed to conceptualization, methodology, resources, investigation, data curation, formal 
analysis, project administration, validation, visualization, writing – original draft, writing – review & 
editing. KF contributed to conceptualization, supervision, resources, methodology, formal analysis, 
writing – review & editing. AP contributed to conceptualization, supervision, resources and writing 
– review & editing.
AUTHOR AFFILIATIONS
Yannik Paul  orcid.org/0009-0001-7153-1840 
Christian-Albrechts-University of Kiel, Germany
Anya Pedersen  orcid.org/0000-0002-5346-4234 
Christian-Albrechts-University of Kiel, Germany
Kamil Fuławka  orcid.org/0000-0002-5343-7818 
Max-Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin, Germany; TUD Dresden University of Technology, 
Dresden, Germany
REFERENCES
Anderson, E. C., Carleton, R. N., Diefenbach, M., & Han, P. K. J. (2019). The relationship between uncertainty 
and affect. Frontiers in Psychology, 10. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02504
Arditte Hall, K. A., & Arditte, S. J. (2024). Threat-related interpretation biases and intolerance of uncertainty 
in individuals exposed to trauma. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 48(6), 1114–1123. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10608-024-10511-y
226
Paul et al.  
Computational Psychiatry  
DOI: 10.5334/cpsy.140Bach, D. R., & Dolan, R. J. (2012). Knowing how much you don’t know: A neural organization of uncertainty 
estimates. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 13(8), 572–586. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3289
Baeyer, C. L. von, Lin, V., Seidman, L. C., Tsao, J. C. I., & Zeltzer, L. K. (2011). Pain charts (body maps or 
manikins) in assessment of the location of pediatric pain. Pain Management, 1(1), 61–68. https://doi.
org/10.2217/pmt.10.2
Bijur, P. E., Latimer, C. T., & Gallagher, E. J. (2003). Validation of a verbally administered numerical rating 
scale of acute pain for use in the emergency department. Academic Emergency Medicine, 10(4), 390–
392. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1553-2712.2003.tb01355.x
Birrell, J., Meares, K., Wilkinson, A., & Freeston, M. (2011). Toward a definition of intolerance of uncertainty: 
A review of factor analytical studies of the Intolerance of Uncertainty Scale. Clinical Psychology Review, 
31(7), 1198–1208. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2011.07.009
Bland, A. R., & Schaefer, A. (2012). Different varieties of uncertainty in human decision-making. Frontiers in 
Neuroscience, 6, Article 85. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2012.00085
Bottesi, G., Ghisi, M., Carraro, E., Barclay, N., Payne, R., & Freeston, M. H. (2016). Revising the Intolerance 
of Uncertainty Model of Generalized Anxiety Disorder: Evidence from UK and Italian undergraduate 
samples. Frontiers in Psychology, 7, Article 1723. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01723
Bottesi, G., Noventa, S., Freeston, M. H., & Ghisi, M. (2019). Seeking certainty about intolerance of 
uncertainty: Addressing old and new issues through the Intolerance of Uncertainty Scale-Revised. PLOS 
ONE, 14(2), Article e0211929. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0211929
Bradley, R., & Drechsler, M. (2013). Types of uncertainty. Erkenntnis, 79, 1225–1248. https://www.doi.
org/10.1007/s10670-013-9518-4
Bredemeier, K., & Berenbaum, H. (2008). Intolerance of Uncertainty and perceived threat. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 46(1), 28–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brat.2007.09.006
Britton, G. I., & Davey, G. C. L. (2014). Interrelationships between negative mood and clinical constructs: 
A motivational systems approach. Frontiers in Psychology, 5, Article 393. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fpsyg.2014.00393
Buhr, K., & Dugas, M. J. (2002). The intolerance of uncertainty scale: Psychometric properties of the 
English version. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 40(8), 931–945. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0005-
7967(01)00092-4
Carleton, R. N. (2012). The intolerance of uncertainty construct in the context of anxiety disorders: 
theoretical and practical perspectives. Expert Reviews of Neurotherapeutics, 12(8), 937–947. https://doi.
org/10.1586/ern.12.82
Carleton, R. N. (2016a). Fear of the unknown: One fear to rule them all? Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 41, 
5–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2016.03.011
Carleton, R. N. (2016b). Into the unknown: A review and synthesis of contemporary models involving 
uncertainty. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 39, 30–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2016.02.007
Carleton, R. N., Duranceau, S., Shulman, E. P., Zerff, M., Gonzales, J., & Mishra, S. (2016). Self-reported 
intolerance of uncertainty and behavioural decisions. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental 
Psychiatry, 51, 58–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbtep.2015.12.004
Carleton, R. N., Mulvogue, M. K., Thibodeau, M. A., McCabe, R. E., Antony, M. M., & Asmundson, G. J. G. 
(2012). Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 26(3), 468–479. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2012.01.011
Charpentier, C. J., Aylward, J., Roiser, J. P., & Robinson, O. J. (2017). Enhanced risk aversion, but not loss 
aversion, in unmedicated pathological anxiety. Biological Psychiatry, 81(12), 1014–1022. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2016.12.010
Cobos, P. L., Quintero, M. J., López, F. J., Luque, D., Ciria, L. F., & Morís, J. (2024). Intolerance of uncertainty 
does not significantly predict decisions about delayed, probabilistic rewards: A failure to replicate 
Luhmann, C. C., Ishida, K., & Hajcak, G. (2011). PloS One, 19(7), Article e0298503. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0298503
Dang, J., King, K. M., & Inzlicht, M. (2020). Why are self-report and behavioral measures weakly correlated? 
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 24(4). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2020.01.007
Deschenes, S. S., Dugas, M. J., Radomsky, A. S., & Buhr, K. (2010). Experimental manipulation of beliefs 
about uncertainty: Effects on interpretive processing and access to threat schemata. Journal of 
Experimental Psychopathology, 1(1). https://doi.org/10.5127/jep.008510
Donthula, D., Kortlever, J. T. P., Ring, D., Donovan, E., Reichel, L. M., & Vagner, G. A. (2020). Does intolerance 
of uncertainty affect the magnitude of limitations or pain intensity? Clinical Orthopaedics and Related 
Research, 478(2), 381–388. https://doi.org/10.1097/CORR.0000000000001042
Douglas, B. D., Ewell, P. J., & Brauer, M. (2023). Data quality in online human-subjects research: Comparisons 
between MTurk, Prolific, CloudResearch, Qualitrics, and Sona. PLoS ONE, 18(3), Article e0279720. https://
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0279720
227
Paul et al.  
Computational Psychiatry  
DOI: 10.5334/cpsy.140Dugas, M. J., Buhr, K., & Ladouceur, R. (2004). The role of intolerance of uncertainty in etiology and 
maintenance. In R. G. Heimberg, C. L. Turk, & D. S. Mennin (Eds.), Generalized anxiety disorder: Advances 
in research and practice (pp. 143–163). The Guilford Press.
Dugas, M. J., Gosselin, P., & Ladouceur, R. (2001). The role of intolerance of uncertainty in 
etiology and maintenance. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 25(5), 551–558. https://doi.
org/10.1023/A:1005553414688
Dugas, M. J., Hedayati, M., Karavidas, A., Buhr, K., Francis, K., & Phillips, N. A. (2005). Intolerance of 
uncertainty and information processing: Evidence of biased recall and interpretations. Cognitive Therapy 
and Research, 29(1), 57–70. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10608-005-1648-9
Ehring, T., Svaldi, J., Tuschen-Caffier, B., & Berking, M. (2013). Validierung der Difficulties in Emotion 
Regulation Scale – deutsche Version [Unpublished Manuscript]. University of Münster.
Einstein, D. A. (2014). Extension of the Transdiagnostic Model to focus on intolerance of uncertainty: A 
review of the literature and implications for treatment. Clinical Psychology, 21(3), 280–300. https://doi.
org/10.1111/cpsp.12077
Freeston, M. H., & Komes, J. (2023). Revisiting uncertainty as a felt sense of unsafety: The somatic error 
theory of intolerance of uncertainty. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 79, Article 
101827. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbtep.2022.101827
Freeston, M. H., Rhéaume, J., Letarte, H., Dugas, M. J., & Ladouceur, R. (1994). Why do people worry? 
Personality and Individual Differences, 17(6), 791–802. https://doi.org/10.1016/0191-8869(94)90048-5
Fulawka, K., & Pachur, T. (2022). An affective probability weighting function for risky choice with 
nonmonetary outcomes. Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 44.
Gentes, E. L., & Ruscio, A. M. (2011). A meta-analysis of the relation of intolerance of uncertainty to 
symptoms of generalized anxiety disorder, major depressive disorder, and obsessive-compulsive 
disorder. Clinical Psychology Review, 31(6), 923–933. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2011.05.001
Gerlach, A. L., Andor, T., & Patzelt, J. (2008). Die Bedeutung von Unsicherheitsintoleranz für die 
Generalisierte Angststörung Modellüberlegungen und Entwicklung einer deutschen Version der 
Unsicherheitsintoleranz-Skala. Klinische Psychologie und Psychotherapie, 37(3), 190–199. https://doi.
org/10.1026/1616-3443.37.3.190
Glöckner, A., Hilbig, B. E., Henninger, F., & Fiedler, S. (2016). The reversed description-experience gap: 
Disentangling sources of presentation format effects in risky choice. Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
General, 145(4), 486–508. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0040103
Gosselin, P., Ladouceur, R., Evers, A., Laverdière, A., Routhier, S., & Tremblay-Picard, M. (2008). Evaluation 
of intolerance of uncertainty: Development and validation of a new self-report measure. Journal of 
Anxiety Disorders, 22(8), 1427–1439. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2008.02.005
Gratz, K. L., & Roemer, L. (2004). Multidimensional assessment of emotion Regulation and dysregulation: 
Development, factor structure, and initial validation of the Difficulties in Emotion Regulation 
Scale. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment, 26, 41–45. https://doi.org/10.1023/
B:JOBA.0000007455.08539.94
Grenier, S., Barrette, A.-M., & Ladouceur, R. (2005). Intolerance of Uncertainty and Intolerance of Ambiguity: 
Similarities and differences. Personality and Individual Differences, 39(3), 593–600. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.paid.2005.02.014
Gutzweiler, R., & In-Albon, T. (2018). Überprüfung der Gütekriterien der deutschen Version der Difficulties 
in Emotion Regulation Scale in einer klinischen und einer Schülerstichprobe Jugendlicher. Klinische 
Psychologie und Psychotherapie, 47(4), 274–286. https://doi.org/10.1026/1616-3443/a000506
Hau, R., Pleskac, T. J., Kiefer, J., & Hertwig, R. (2008). The description–experience gap in risky choice: The 
role of sample size and experienced probabilities. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 21(5), 493–518. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/bdm.598
Hertwig, R., Barron, G., Weber, E. U., & Erev, I. (2004). Decisions from experience and the effect of 
rare events in risky choice. Psychological Science, 15(8), 534–539. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0956-
7976.2004.00715.x
Hertwig, R., & Erev, I. (2009). The description-experience gap in risky choice. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 
13(12), 517–523. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2009.09.004
Holaway, R. M., Heimberg, R. G., & Coles, E. C. (2006). A comparison of intolerance of uncertainty in 
analogue obsessive-compulsive disorder and generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 
20(2), 158–174. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2005.01.002
Huq, S. F., Garety, P. A., & Hemsley, D. R. (1988). Probabilistic judgements in deluded and non-
deluded subjects. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 40(4), 801–812. https://doi.
org/10.1080/14640748808402300
228
Paul et al.  
Computational Psychiatry  
DOI: 10.5334/cpsy.140Jacoby, R. J., Abramowitz, J. S., Buck, B. E., & Fabricant, L. E. (2014). How is the Beads Task related to 
intolerance of uncertainty in anxiety disorders? Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 28(6), 495–503. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2014.05.005
Jacoby, R. J., Abramowitz, J. S., Reuman, L., & Blakey, S. M. (2016). Enhancing the ecological validity of 
the Beads Task as a behavioral measure of intolerance of uncertainty. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 41, 
43–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2016.02.003
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica, 47(2), 
263–292. https://doi.org/10.2307/1914185
Kellen, D., Pachur, T., & Hertwig, R. (2016). How (in)variant are subjective representations of described and 
experienced risk and rewards? Cognition, 157, 126–138. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2016.08.020
Keller, L. R. (1992). Properties of utility theories and related empirical phenomena. In W. Edwards (Ed.), 
Utility Theories: Measurements and Applications. Studies in Risk and Uncertainty (vol 3, pp. 3–23). 
Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-011-2952-7_1
Ladouceur, R., Talbot, F., & Dugas, M. J. (1997). Behavioral expressions of intolerance of 
uncertainty in worry. Experimental findings. Behavior Modification, 21(3), 355–371. https://doi.
org/10.1177/01454455970213006
Lejarraga, T., Pachur, T., Frey, R., & Hertwig, R. (2016). Decisions from experience: From monetary to medical 
gambles. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 29(1), 67–77. https://doi.org/10.1002/bdm.1877
Luhmann, C. C., Ishida, K., & Hajcak, G. (2011). Intolerance of uncertainty and decisions about delayed, 
probabilistic rewards. Behavior Therapy, 42(3), 378–386. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beth.2010.09.002
Mamerow, L., Frey, R., & Mata, R. (2016). Risk taking across the life span: A comparison of self-reported and 
behavioral measures of risk-taking. Psychology and Aging, 31(7), 711–723. https://doi.org/10.1037/
pag0000124
McEvoy, P. M., & Erceg-Hurn, D. M. (2016). The search for universal transdiagnostic and trans-therapy 
change processes: Evidence for intolerance of uncertainty. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 41, 96–107. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2016.02.002
McEvoy, P. M., & Mahoney, A. E. J. (2012). To be sure, to be sure: Intolerance of uncertainty mediates 
symptoms of various anxiety disorders and depression. Behavior Therapy, 43(3), 533–545. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.beth.2011.02.007
McEvoy, P. M., & Mahoney, A. E. J. (2013). Intolerance of uncertainty and negative metacognitive beliefs 
as transdiagnostic mediators of repetitive negative thinking in a clinical sample with anxiety disorders. 
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 27(2), 216–224. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2013.01.006
Milne, S., Lomax, C., & Freeston, M. H. (2019). A review of the relationship between intolerance of uncertainty 
and threat appraisal in anxiety. The Cognitive Behaviour Therapist, 12, 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1017/
s1754470x19000230
Morein-Zamir, S., Shapher, S., Gasull-Camos, J., Fineberg, N. A., & Robbins, T. W. (2020). Avoid jumping 
to conclusions under uncertainty in obsessive compulsive disorder. PLoS ONE, 15(1), Article e0225970. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0225970
Morriss, J., Christakou, A., & van Reekum, C. M. (2016). Nothing is safe: Intolerance of uncertainty is 
associated with compromised fear extinction learning. Biological Psychology, 121(Pt B), 187–193. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsycho.2016.05.001
Morriss, J., Francesco, S., Chapman, C., Pollard, M., & van Reekum, C. M. (2019). Out with the old and in with 
the new: The role of intolerance of uncertainty in reversal of threat and safety. Journal of Experimental 
Psychopathology, 10(1). https://doi.org/10.1177/2043808719834451
Morriss, J., Tupitsa, E., Dodd, H. F., & Hirsch, C. R. (2022). Uncertainty makes me emotional: Uncertainty as 
an elicitor and modulator of emotional states. Frontiers in Psychology, 13, Article 777025. https://doi.
org/10.3389/fpsyg.2022.777025
Mosca, I., Lauriola, M., & Carleton, R. N. (2016). Intolerance of uncertainty: A temporary Experimental 
induction procedure. PLoS ONE, 11(6), Article e0155130. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0155130
Mousavi, S., & Gigerenzer, G. (2014). Risk, uncertainty, and heuristics. Journal of Business Research, 67(8), 
1671–1678. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2014.02.013
O’Bryan, E. M., Beadel, J. R., McLeish, A. C., & Teachman, B. A. (2021). Assessment of intolerance of 
uncertainty: Validation of a modified anagram task. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental 
Psychiatry, 73, Article 101671. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbtep.2021.101671
Osmanağaoğlu, N., Creswell, C., Snuggs, S, Stuijfzand, S., & Dodd, H. F. (2021). Evaluating the psychometric 
properties of the intolerance of uncertainty scale for children in a preadolescent sample. Journal of 
Anxiety Disorders, 77, Article 102343. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2020.102343
Ouellet, C., Langlois, F., Provencher, M. D., & Gosselin, P. (2019). Intolerance of uncertainty and difficulties in 
emotion regulation: Proposal for an integrative model of generalized anxiety disorder. European Review 
of Applied Psychology, 69(1), 9–18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erap.2019.01.001
229
Paul et al.  
Computational Psychiatry  
DOI: 10.5334/cpsy.140Pachur, T., Hertwig, R., & Wolkewitz, R. (2014). The affect gap in risky choice: Affect-rich outcomes 
attenuate attention to probability information. Decision, 1(1), 64–78. https://doi.org/10.1037/
dec0000006
Peirce, J., Gray. J. R., Simpson, S., MacAskill, M., Höchenberger, R., Sogo, H. Kastman, E., & Lindeløv, J. 
K. (2019). PsychoPy2: Experiments in behavior made easy. Behavior Research Methods, 51, 195–203. 
https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-018-01193-y
Pepperdine, E., Lomax, C., & Freeston, M. H. (2018). Disentangling intolerance of uncertainty and threat 
appraisal in everyday situations. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 57, 31–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
janxdis.2018.04.002
Prelec, D. (1998). The probability weighting function. Econometrica, 66(3), 497–527. https://doi.
org/10.2307/2998573
R Core Team. (2022). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical 
Computing.
Reuman, L., Jacoby, R. J., Fabricant, L. E., Herring, B., & Abramowitz, J. S. (2015). Uncertainty as an anxiety 
cue at high and low levels of threat. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 47, 111–
119. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbtep.2014.12.002
Rowe, W. D. (1994). Understanding uncertainty. Risk Analysis, 14(5), 743–750. https://doi.org/10.1111/j. 1539-
6924.1994.tb00284.x
Sahib, A., Chen, J., Cárdenas, D., & Calear, A. L. (2023). Intolerance of uncertainty and emotion regulation: 
A meta-analytic and systematic review. Clinical Psychology Review, 101, Article 102270. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cpr.2023.102270
Sandhu, T. R., Xiao, B., & Lawson, R. P. (2023). Transdiagnostic computations of uncertainty: Towards a new 
lens on intolerance of uncertainty. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 148, Article 105123. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2023.105123
Schwartz, A., Goldberg, J., & Hazen, G. (2008). Prospect theory, reference points, and health decisions. 
Judgment and Decision Making, 3(2), 174–180. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1930297500001510
Shihata, S., McEvoy, P. M., & Mullan, B. A. (2017). Pathways from uncertainty to anxiety: An evaluation 
of a hierarchical model of trait and disorder-specific intolerance of uncertainty on anxiety disorder 
symptoms. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 45, 72–79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2016.12.001
Shihata, S., McEvoy, P. M., Mullan, B. A., & Carleton, R. N. (2016). Intolerance of uncertainty in emotional 
disorders: What uncertainties remain? Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 41, 115–124. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2016.05.001
Sporrer, J. K., Johann, A., Chumbley, J., Robinson, O. J., & Bach, D. R. (2024). Induced worry increases risk 
aversion in patients with generalized anxiety. Behavioural Brain Research, 474, Article 115192. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2024.115192
Stan Development Team. (2024a). RStan: the R interface to Stan. https://mc-stan.org/
Stan Development Team. (2024b). Stan Modeling Language Users Guide and Reference Manual, Version 2.35. 
https://mc-stan.org
Stancak, A., Xie, Y., Fallon, N., Bulsing, P., Giesbrecht, T., Thomas, A., & Pantelous, A. A. (2015). Unpleasent 
odors increases aversion to monetary losses. Biological Psychology, 107, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biopsycho.2015.02.006
Starcevic, V., & Berle, D. (2006). Cognitive specificity of anxiety disorders: A review of selected key constructs. 
Depression and Anxiety, 23(2), 51–61. https://doi.org/10.1002/da.20145
Stott, H. P. (2006). Cumulative prospect theory’s functional menagerie. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 32, 
101–130. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11166-006-8289-6
Suter, R. S., Pachur, T., & Hertwig, R. (2016). How affect shapes risky choice: Distorted probability 
weighting versus probability neglect. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 29(4), 437–449. https://doi.
org/10.1002/bdm.1888
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1991). Loss aversion in riskless choice: A reference-dependent model. The 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106(4), 1039–1061. https://doi.org/10.2307/2937956
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1992). Advances in prospect theory: Cumulative representation of uncertainty. 
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 5, 297–323. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00122574
Ungemach, C., Chater, N., & Stewart, N. (2009). Are probabilities overweighted or underweighted when 
rare outcomes are experienced (rarely)? Psychological Science, 20(4), 473–479. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1467-9280.2009.02319.x
van Doorn, J., Ly, A., Marsman, M., & Wagenmakers, E.-J. (2020). Bayesian rank-based hypothesis testing 
for the rank sum test, the signed rank test, and Spearman’s ρ. Journal of Applied Statistics, 47(16), 1984–
3006. https://doi.org/10.1080/02664763.2019.1709053
230
Paul et al.  
Computational Psychiatry  
DOI: 10.5334/cpsy.140
TO CITE THIS ARTICLE:
Paul, Y., Pedersen, A., & 
Fuławka, K. (2025). 
Decomposing Intolerance of 
Uncertainty: No Association 
With Affective Decision Making 
in a Community Sample. 
Computational Psychiatry, 9(1), 
pp. 210–230. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.5334/cpsy.140
Submitted: 25 February 2025 
Accepted: 08 September 2025 
Published: 18 September 2025
COPYRIGHT:
© 2025 The Author(s). This is an 
open-access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution 4.0 
International License (CC-BY 
4.0), which permits unrestricted 
use, distribution, and 
reproduction in any medium, 
provided the original author 
and source are credited. See 
http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
Computational Psychiatry is 
a peer-reviewed open access 
journal published by Ubiquity 
Press.
Vander Haegen, M., Etienne, A.-M., & Duregger, C. (2016). Cognitive processes across anxiety disorders 
related to intolerance of uncertainty: Clinical review. Cogent Psychology, 3(1), Article 1215773. https://
doi.org/10.1080/23311908.2016.1215773
Verma, A. A., Razak, F., & Detsky, A. S. (2014). Understanding choice: Why physicians should learn prospect 
theory. JAMA, 311(6), 571–572. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2013.285245
Vives, M. L., & FeldmanHall, O. (2018). Tolerance to ambiguous uncertainty predicts prosocial behavior. 
Nature Communications, 9(1), 2156. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-04631-9
von Helversen, B., Coppin, G., & Scheibehenne, B. (2020). Money does not stink: Using unpleasant odors as 
stimulus material changes risky decision making. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 44(5), 567–701. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/bdm.2178
Wilson, E. J., Abbott, M. J., & Norton, A. R. (2023). The impact of psychological treatment on intolerance of 
uncertainty in generalized anxiety disorder: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Anxiety 
Disorders, 97, Article 102729. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2023.102729
Wulff, D. U., Mergenthaler-Canseco, M., & Hertwig, R. (2018). A meta-analytic review of two modes of 
learning and the description-experience gap. Psychological Bulletin, 144(2), 140–176. https://doi.
org/10.1037/bul0000115