jaPa
1169DOI: 10.1177/00030651221137497
70/6Mark Solms
Reply to CommentaRies
I 
am grateful for the interest in my paper. I will respond to these two 
commentaries in the order I received them.
alan sugaRman
In the introductory section of his commentary, Alan Sugarman expresses 
disappointment that I did not outline a general psychology in my paper. 
Having come to the view that it is “a manifesto designed to demonstrate 
the broader psychoanalytic relevance of neuroscience” (p. 1139), he says 
that it does not properly address such fundamental topics as development, 
pathogenesis, and mutative action; it ignores much of developmental and 
cognitive psychology; and it “goes from neurobiology and chemistry 
directly to mental experience” (p. 1141). These are unexpected criticisms 
of a paper focused on drive theory, and which makes no claim to present 
a general psychology. In the circumstances, I can only suggest that 
Sugarman reads what I have written—within this same theoretical frame-
work—on those other topics that interest him (e.g., Solms 2017a,b, 
2018a,b,c, 2019a,b). The same applies to what I have written on the topic 
of dreams, which might prompt Sugarman to reconsider his view that 
neurophysiology “does not provide any understanding into the meaning 
of dreams” (p. 1143). I think it fair to say that my work on this topic has 
reestablished the fact, long denied by other neuroscientists, that dreams 
are meaningful and motivated (see, e.g., Solms 1997, 2000a,b, 2001a,b, 
2004, 2009, 2012, 2014; Solms and Hobson 2006; Solms and Turnbull 
2006; Malcolm-Smith et al. 2012).
Director of Neuropsychology, University of Cape Town and Groote Schuur 
Hospital; Co-Chair, International Neuropsychoanalysis Society; Science Director, 
American Psychoanalytic Association.
Submitted for publication September 11, 2022; accepted September 15, 2022.
1137497APAXXX10.1177/00030651221137497mark solmsReply to Commentaries
research-article2022

Mark Solms
1170
In the second section of his commentary, Sugarman argues that my 
paper is reductionistic in that it ignores sociological and psychological 
levels of analysis in favor of the neurobiological. He is right to say that 
“each of these levels is important to understanding some area of human 
functioning” (p. 1142), but he seems to have overlooked the opening 
paragraphs of my paper, which explain why the neurobiological level is 
particularly important for drive theory. Anyone who shares Sugarman’s 
view that “neuroscientific concepts are relevant only in explaining brain 
functioning, not mental functioning” (p. 1142), should carefully reread 
the quotations from Freud that I provided in those opening paragraphs. 
Freud (1920) spoke of “the necessity for borrowing from the science of 
biology” (p. 60). This view, held by the founder of psychoanalysis, to the 
effect that borrowing from biology is necessary when it comes to drive 
theory, hopefully puts an end to Sugarman’s further argument that I use 
neurobiological concepts “to make [the revision of drive] theory sound 
scientific without acknowledging that they are relevant only to phenom-
ena other than those dealt with by psychoanalysis” (p. 1142). Freud, at 
least, accepted that the concept of drive belongs to neurobiology no less 
than it does to psychoanalysis.
Sugarman goes on to proclaim that “no superordinate model of human 
functioning has yet been discovered that can encompass and integrate the 
neurological and psychological spheres of human experience” (p. 1142). He 
adds, with reference to the philosophical “hard problem,” that the superordi-
nate mathematical and physical models I use “can be understood only as 
metaphors” (p. 1142). I assume from this that Sugarman has not read my 
book (2021b) on the hard problem, which shows that mathematical and 
physical concepts like entropy and Markov blankets are anything but meta-
phors. Simply put: they explain the workings of the mind and the brain, both. 
In this regard, Sugarman might also find the commentaries on my book by 
the philosophers Thomas Nagel and Daniel Dennett—and my replies to 
them—enlightening (Nagel 2021; Dennett 2021; Solms 2021c).
The assertion, in the third section of Sugarman’s commentary, that 
“Solms writes as though representations are not part of the psychological 
amalgam that makes each individual’s cognitive/emotional mind unique”  
(p. 1143) suggests that he does not fully understand the concept of a “predic-
tive model” (which is mentioned repeatedly in my paper). Predictive models 
perform precisely that individualizing and representational function; they 
are conceptually identical with what Freud called “memory systems.”
Reply to CommentaRies
1171
Next, in his fourth section, Sugarman cites psychoanalytic authorities 
from the 1960s and 1970s to make the point that “the concept of psychic 
energy . . . is based on Freud’s outdated understanding of physics”  
(p. 1144). The absolute starting point of my paper is the fact that subse-
quent developments in physics enable us to replace Freud’s thermody-
namic conception of psychic energy with an informational one.
The same applies to Sugarman’s further claim—in the fifth section of 
his commentary—that my conception of the ego is “anthropomorphic” 
(p. 1145). This misconstrues the concept of “active inference,” which is 
derived from modern statistical physics (see Friston 2013). Complex 
dynamic self-organizing systems that use active inference are indeed 
“self-activating and self-regulating, autonomous . . . , independent,  
symbol-utilizing minds that can make themselves up” (Schafer 1973,  
p. 166, quoted by Sugarman, p. 1145).
The sixth section of Sugarman’s commentary—“The Absence of 
Subjective Experience and Meaning in a Neuropsychoanalytic Model”—
rehearses Blass and Carmeli’s critique of neuropsychoanalysis as a whole 
(2007). I have twice engaged with Rachel Blass directly on these issues, 
in Oxford-rules debates before psychoanalytic audiences (Solms and 
Blass 2008, 2017). On both occasions, the voting went decidedly against 
her. Unfortunately, she declined to allow a video recording to be posted 
on the internet; interested readers can read my reply to Barnaby Barrett’s 
very similar critique of neuropsychoanalysis as a whole (Solms 2015b). 
Here I have space to respond only briefly to Sugarman’s main two con-
cerns, namely, subjective experience and meaning.
Concerning the former, Sugarman says that “Solms writes as though 
mind is a biological entity” (p. 1146). That is true: I consider psychology 
to be part of the life sciences. Like Freud, I think the mind is embodied 
and that it evolved to perform specific biological functions. It does not 
follow, however, that I “minimize the importance of subjectivity both in 
theory and in clinical psychoanalytic practice” (p. 1146). It is precisely 
because I was so frustrated by the neglect of subjectivity in neuroscience 
that I decided to train as a psychoanalyst (see Solms 2021b). 
Neuropsychoanalysis was, and remains, a concerted effort to persuade 
my neuroscientific colleagues that we will never understand how the 
brain works if we neglect its most unique property: that it feels like some-
thing to be a brain. Surely the capacity for subjectivity does something 
(see Solms 2015b; Solms and Turnbull 2002). This is not a reductionist 
Mark Solms
1172
materialist view. Like most neuropsychoanalysts, I am a dual-aspect 
monist, which means I take the view that the functional dynamics of what 
Freud called the “mental apparatus” can be studied from two different 
observational perspectives: the outer, objective one (seeing a brain) and 
the inner, subjective one (being a brain). These two perspectives are com-
plementary; neither is ontologically more “real” than the other (see Solms 
1995). It was precisely this mistake—and a neglect of the subjective per-
spective—that led my colleagues to erroneously reduce dreaming to REM 
sleep (see the references above).
Concerning meaning making, I must agree with Sugarman (quoting 
Pulver 2003, p. 762) that neuroscience may “say something about the gen-
eral functioning of . . . motivations, but by its very nature it can say little 
about the meaning they have for an individual” (p. 1146). This is roughly 
equivalent to what I said about “meaning making” on pp. 1067–1068 of 
my paper. I agree completely that neuroscientific methods are not suited to 
investigating what is idiosyncratically meaningful for each individual; that 
is why I have always argued that we need to use both neuroscientific and 
psychoanalytic methods. However, neuroscience certainly can reveal 
important things about the nature of human motivation and meaning mak-
ing in general, and that is what my paper is about. As regards the clinical 
utility of such new knowledge, I would encourage Sugarman to reread 
what I wrote about this on p. 1080 of my paper, and also to read Solms 
(2018b) and Smith and Solms (2018). These two articles—which are all 
that I have published on the topic to date—should reassure him that it is 
certainly not my view that “analytically oriented treatment” consists of 
“helping the patient know her historical reality using logic and manifest 
content” and that I show “no attempt to understand or address the uncon-
scious logic and meaning” behind my patients’ beliefs (p. 1147).
The seventh and last section of Sugarman’s commentary concerns my 
revision of drive theory itself. He writes that in the United States “theorists 
rarely use the actual concept of drive these days; instead, we use the term 
wish, a psychological concept that involves a mental representation. Wish 
is not an abstract, biological, or mechanistic concept based on dubious 
ideas about erogenous zones and psychic energy” (p. 1148). The opening 
sections of my paper, already cited above, make clear what is at stake if 
psychoanalysis renounces the concept of drive. A rereading of my paper 
will also make clear to unbiased colleagues that it is by no means a defense 
of “dubious ideas about erogenous zones.” Rather, I am of the view that 
Reply to CommentaRies
1173
Freud’s oral, anal, phallic, and genital “components” of the libidinal drive 
are in fact independent entities, only one of which deserves to be described 
as sexual. I believe that these so-called component libidinal drives are bet-
ter conceptualized under the separate headings of PANIC/GRIEF, RAGE, 
PLAY , and LUST, respectively. (See my commentary on Kernberg [Solms 
2021d].)
Next Sugarman writes: “To restrict the concept [of drive] to phenom-
ena rising from the body (brain) leaves out psychological constructs like 
object relations, safety, holding, fantasy” (p. 1148). In my paper, I make the 
point very clearly that the sources of drive should not be restricted to the 
body. Moreover, my revised conception of drive (in stark contrast to 
Freud’s) is intrinsically object-relational. How can we conceive of a PANIC/
GRIEF drive without reference to a care-giving object, a RAGE drive with-
out reference to a frustrating object, a PLAY drive without reference to 
friendly objects, a FEAR drive without reference to threatening objects, a 
CARE drive without reference to dependent objects, and so on?
Even more surprisingly, Sugarman decries my neglect of “the impor-
tance of internal conflict” (p. 1148). My paper states clearly that seven 
emotional drives provide more scope for internal conflict, not less, than 
Freud’s two.
Sugarman ends the final section of his commentary by saying that 
“there is nothing in the paper that demonstrates any conceptual advantage 
to defining drives as he does” (p. 1149). Why? Because my conceptual-
ization of drive as free energy (i.e., as the average error between predicted 
and actual outcomes) boils down to “adaptation,” which is “traditionally 
seen as involving primarily the ego, not the drives” (p. 1149). The fact is, 
prediction-error values just are a measure of the demand made upon the 
ego for work (which is, lest we forget, Freud’s definition of drive). The 
free energy principle is a unifying principle stating that homeostatic 
demands (drives) are nothing other than demands for predictive (i.e., rep-
resentational, cognitive) work. Which reminds me: the concept of predic-
tion occupies much the same place in computational neuroscience as does 
the concept of wish in Freud’s metapsychology. (On this score, for a 
detailed treatment, see Solms 2020).
paul sChwaRtz
In the introductory section of his commentary, Paul Schwartz says that 
Freud’s notions of free and bound energy are based only loosely on 
Mark Solms
1174
Helmholtzian physics, “which as near as can be determined, Freud him-
self never formally acknowledged” (p. 1158). But it hardly needed 
acknowledgment; everybody knew, in Freud’s day, that these terms were 
introduced by Helmholtz (1882). Schwartz goes on to say that “it should 
be noted, however, that Freud’s free and bound neuronal cathectic ener -
gies were chiefly distinguished not by their thermodynamic properties, 
but by whether their hypothesized electrical neuronal cathexes were freely 
and flexibly deployable by the mental apparatus” (p. 1159). This elides 
the starting points of my paper, that the nineteenth-century thermody-
namic understanding of entropy was deepened in the twentieth century 
when Jaynes (1957) showed that thermodynamic entropy is merely an 
application of information entropy—which links directly with the way 
Freud used the concept. As I have said in my response to Sugarman, 
recent developments in physics enable us to replace Freud’s thermody-
namic conception of free energy with an informational one.
Schwartz says also that Helmholtz contributed to the formulation of 
“the Second Law of Thermodynamics (not the First, as Solms states)”  
(p. 1159). I have never before heard anyone question Helmholtz’s funda-
mental contribution (1847) to the First Law!
In the second section of his commentary, Schwartz quotes Panksepp 
and Biven’s metaphorical use of the term “ancestral memories” (2012) to 
support his claim that “phylogenetic memories exist in our unconscious” 
(p. 1160). I have discussed this issue fully elsewhere (Solms 2022), so 
here I will just say that everything pivots on the word “memory.” Speaking 
neuroscientifically, as opposed to metaphorically, there are no such things 
as inherited memories, let alone episodic memories, which is what Freud 
posited. (Instincts are not memories.)
Next, Schwartz questions my assertion that Freud considered the 
phrase “unconscious affect” an oxymoron. He quotes Freud at length, in 
an attempt to show that he was equivocal on this score. I can reply (as the 
editor and translator of Freud’s complete works) that, if one studies his 
writings on this issue in their totality, one is left in no doubt that he 
rejected the notion of unconscious affect, utterly, from first to last. 
Whenever he says that we speak of “unconscious affects,” he immedi-
ately clarifies that we speak loosely, because the notion is metapsycho-
logically incorrect. Actually, Freud’s position is well summarized in one 
of the sentences that Schwartz quotes: “Strictly speaking, then, and 
although no fault can be found with the linguistic usage, there are no 
Reply to CommentaRies
1175
unconscious affects” (Freud 1915b, p. 178). Quoting The Ego and the Id, 
where Freud speaks of an “unconscious sense of guilt,” Schwartz seems 
to think that his earlier position was part of “his [abandoned] discharge 
theory of affects” (p. 1161). I must therefore draw attention to what Freud 
(1924c) wrote after 1923: “we [should] give up the term ‘unconscious 
sense of guilt’, which is in any case psychologically incorrect, and speak 
instead of a ‘need for punishment’” (p. 166). (For a detailed discussion of 
this matter, see Solms in press.)
In his third section, Schwartz says: “Solms reasons as follows: drives 
are by my definition conscious; therefore, I conclude that drives must be 
conscious” (p. 1161). That is not my reasoning. Freud (1915a) defines 
drive as “a measure of the demand made upon the mind for work”  
(p. 121). Autonomic forms of homeostasis, such as blood-pressure regu-
lation and the like, do not make demands upon the mind; that is why I use 
the word “needs” for them, rather than “drives.” In my paper, I present 
detailed arguments in support of my claim that needs become drives only 
when we feel them. However, Schwartz claims: “In support of his conten-
tion, Solms argues that often we engage in sex while trying not to repro-
duce, and he suggests that sexual behavior is determined predominantly, 
if not entirely, by our voluntary conscious choice” (p. 1162). I say nothing 
of the sort. I say only that although the evolved mechanisms that underpin 
our felt urges (sexual and otherwise) are unconscious, the urges them-
selves are felt. This doesn’t mean that such urges are voluntary; it means 
only that they drive voluntary behavior.
Next Schwartz questions my statement that “the energy that is not 
currently employed in effective work is ‘free’” (p. 1163; emphasis 
removed); “here again,” he says, “Solms is not correct. In fact, the amount 
of energy within a system that is available to do work is the free energy, 
whereas the amount of energy within a system that is unavailable to do 
work is the bound energy” (p. 1163; emphasis added). This is a misread-
ing; I wrote that “the energy that is not currently employed in effective 
work is ‘free’” (emphasis added). “Not currently employed in work” 
therefore means “currently available for work.” In other words, Schwartz 
and I say the same thing: the energy that is not currently employed is 
available; that is, it is free to do work.
Schwartz goes on to say that I mistakenly equate Friston’s variational 
free energy with thermodynamic free energy. “At the outset,” he writes, 
“Friston explicitly stated that his informational free-energy principle 
Mark Solms
1176
should be distinguished from the statistical-thermodynamic free-energy” 
(p. 1163). He then quotes Friston as saying, “the only link between these 
two uses of the term ‘free energy’ is mathematical; i.e., both appeal to the 
same probabilistic fundaments” (p. 1163). Friston’s point here is a version 
of the one I made above, with reference to Jaynes. Thermodynamic free 
energy is rooted in the same mathematical formalism as variational free 
energy, where there is an information exchange between a system and its 
environment, as opposed to a heat and temperature exchange.
Still on the subject of Friston, Schwartz continues:
Friston and colleagues have already formulated several interesting preliminary 
attempts to extend the free-energy principle to several aspects of Freudian meta-
psychology . . . , though none of these papers directly address the issue of 
Freudian drives. Thus, . . . we must for now temper our enthusiasm for Solms’s 
claim that “Friston’s free energy principle achieves Freud’s greatest ambition, 
namely, ‘to furnish a psychology that shall be a natural science: that is, to repre-
sent psychical processes as quantitatively determinate states of specifiable mate-
rial particles, thus making those processes perspicuous and free from 
contradiction” (Freud 1895, p. 295) [p. 1164].
Actually, Friston and I wrote a paper (Solms and Friston 2018) in which 
we make explicit reference to Freudian drives in the way I conceptualize 
them in the paper under discussion here; we even use Freud’s terms 
(1895) to formalize the mechanics. Moreover, in three subsequent publi-
cations (Solms 2019a, 2020, 2021b), I have elaborated our quantitative 
arguments and spelled out in considerable detail their roots in Freudian 
drive theory. The second of these papers was accompanied by a commen-
tary written by Friston, strongly supporting my approach to this aspect of 
Freudian theory.
Schwartz misunderstands also my remarks about the confluence of 
drives. Of course, I agree that there are hybrid forms of emotion. Thus, for 
example, I explain (on p. 1074 of my paper) that the primary drives of 
PANIC/GRIEF and RAGE interact to yield the secondary emotion of 
guilt. My point about confluence is simply that drives are categorical 
variables in the sense that each one of them must be satisfied in its own 
right (otherwise we die); and that this is why they are qualitatively 
distinct.
With respect to my arguments for a conscious id, Schwartz writes: 
“Solms’s theoretical reasoning is once again flawed. . . . the most parsi-
monious explanation . . . is to simply relocate Freud’s mostly conscious 
Reply to CommentaRies
1177
ego to the upper brainstem and relocate Freud’s unconscious id to the 
cerebral cortex; that is, the ego and the id should simply trade their ana-
tomical homes” (p. 1165). Anybody who knows anything about the upper 
brainstem will surely agree that it cannot possibly support the functions 
that Freud assigned to the ego; likewise, anyone who knows anything 
about the cerebral cortex will agree that it cannot perform the functions he 
assigned to the id.
Schwartz closes his third section with the statement that, since 
“defenses are unconscious, what exactly is being defended against if not 
unconscious affects?” (p. 1165). The following two extracts from Solms 
(in press) clarify this issue.
1
The unconscious ego, with its defensive functions, strives to gain control of 
affective consciousness [i.e., the id]. This goal of the ego can be achieved in 
various ways. At one theoretical extreme, the ego can convert affective con-
sciousness entirely into cognitive consciousness. This coincides with the ficti-
tious case of Mr. Spock, where the (affective) drive—or the “demand made upon 
the mind for work”—exerted by the id upon the ego yields perfectly efficient 
(cognitive) work. At the opposite extreme, the ego can also fail entirely to 
achieve this goal, in which case it will be overwhelmed by affect, and cogni-
tively incapacitated. At yet another extreme, the ego can exclude affective con-
sciousness from its (cognitive) realm entirely. This results in the id generating 
negative affects of which the ego has no knowledge; a common enough  
situation, as every psychoanalyst will attest. . . .
2 All the common-and-garden 
varieties of defence can be located between the theoretical extremes I have just 
described.
Here is the second extract:
Freud (1920) writes: “The problem of the quality of drive impulses and of its 
persistence throughout their various vicissitudes is still very obscure and has 
hardly been attacked up to the present” (p. 44; emphasis added). One of these 
vicissitudes, he continues, is a desexualization of the libidinal drive, which then 
becomes a “displaceable and neutral energy” (p. 44; emphasis added). This can 
only mean that it has lost its erotic quality. He continues: “If this displaceable 
energy is desexualized libido, it may also be described as sublimated energy; for 
it would still retain the main purpose of Eros. . . . If thought-processes in the 
wider sense are to be included among these displacements, then the activity of 
1In the Freud quotations in these extracts, I have translated Trieb as “drive” rather than 
Strachey’s “instinct,” and Triebkraft as “driving forces” rather than Strachey’s “motive forces.”
2Here we recognize one variety of the oxymoronic “unconscious feelings.”
Mark Solms
1178
thinking is also supplied from the sublimation of erotic driving forces” (p. 45). 
This is a model example of the process I formulated above concerning how the 
unconscious ego, via its defensive function, gains control over affective con-
sciousness. This is how the drive demand for work exerted by the id yields 
efficient work by the ego. Sublimation, I submit, is the means by which the 
primary, affective form of consciousness is converted by the ego into the second-
ary, cognitive form.
In his closing section, Schwartz concludes: “while Solms has proposed a 
number of quite radical revisions to Freudian drive theory, these revisions 
do not hold up to close scientific scrutiny” (p. 1165). I don’t agree with 
this assessment. It is Freud’s drive theory that does not hold up to modern 
scientific scrutiny; the proposed revisions, by contrast, are sound and 
should serve us well.
RefeRences
Blass, R., & CaRmeli, Z. (2007) . The case against neuropsychoanalysis: On 
fallacies underlying psychoanalysis’ latest scientific trend and its nega-
tive impact on psychoanalytic discourse. International Journal of 
Psychoanalysis 88:19–40.
Dennett, D. (2021) . The user-illusion of consciousness. Journal of 
Consciousness Studies 28:167–177.
FReuD, s. (1895) . Project for a scientific psychology. Standard Edition 
1:295–397.
FReuD, s. (1915 a). Instincts and their vicissitudes. Standard Edition 14: 
117–140.
FReuD, s. (1915b). The unconscious. Standard Edition 14:166–204.
FReuD, s. (1920). Beyond the pleasure principle. Standard Edition 18:7–64.
FReuD, s. (1924) . The economic problem of masochism. Standard Edition 
19:159–170.
FRiston, K. (2013). Life as we know it. Journal of the Royal Society Interface 
10:20130475.
HelmHoltZ, H. (1847). Über die Erhaltung der Kraft. Berlin: Reimer.
HelmHoltZ, H. (1882) . Die Thermodynamik chemischer V orgänge. In 
Wissenschaftliche Abhandlungen von Hermann von Helmholtz. V ol. 2. 
Leipzig: J.A. Barth, pp. 958–978.
Jaynes, e. (1957) . Information theory and statistical mechanics. Physical 
Review 106:620–630.
malColm-smitH, s., KoopowitZ, s., pantelis, e., & solms, m. (2012). Approach/
avoidance in dreams. Cognition & Consciousness 21:408–412.
Reply to CommentaRies
1179
nagel, t. (2021). Comment on The Hidden Spring. Journal of Consciousness 
Studies 28:203–209.
panKsepp, J., & Biven, l. (2012). The Archaeology of Mind: Neuroevolutionary 
Origins of Human Emotions. New York: Norton.
pulveR, s.e. (2003). On the astonishing clinical irrelevance of neuroscience. 
Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association 51:755–772.
sCHaFeR, R. (1973) . Action: Its place in psychoanalytic theory. Annual of 
Psychoanalysis 1:159–196.
smitH, R., & solms, m. (2018) Examination of the hypothesis that repression 
is premature automatization: A psychoanalytic case report and discus-
sion. Neuropsychoanalysis 20:47–61.
solms, m. (1995) . Is the brain more real than the mind? Psychoanalytic 
Psychotherapy 9:107–120.
solms, m. (1997). The Neuropsychology of Dreams: A Clinico-Anatomical 
Study. Institute for Research in Behavioral Neuroscience Monograph 
Series, No 7. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
solms, m. (2000 a). Dreaming and REM sleep are controlled by different 
brain mechanisms. Behavior & Brain Science 23:843–850.
solms, m. (2000 b). Freudian dream theory today. The Psychologist 13: 
618–619.
solms, m. (2001 a). The interpretation of dreams and the neurosciences. 
Psychoanalytic History 3:79–91.
solms, m. (2001b). The neurochemistry of dreaming: Cholinergic and dopa-
minergic hypotheses. In The Neurochemistry of Consciousness, ed. E. 
Perry, H. Ashton, & A. Young. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, pp. 123–
131.
solms, m. (2004). Dream research in the court of public opinion. Dreaming 
14:18–20.
solms, m. (2009). Freudian dreams today. Frontiers in Neuroscience 3:70.
solms, m. (2012). Freud, Sigmund. In Encyclopedia of Sleep and Dreams: 
The Evolution, Function, Nature, and Mysteries of Slumber, ed. D. 
Barrett & P. McNamara. V ol. 1. Santa Barbara, CA: Greenwood,  
pp. 290–291.
solms, m. (2014). ‘Do you agree that Freud’s dream theory was erroneous 
with respect to (1) the genesis of dreaming (release of repressed infantile 
wishes) and (2) the bizarreness of dreams (disguise and censorship of 
unacceptable wishes?’ In Dream Consciousness: Allan Hobson’ s New 
Approach to the Brain and Its Mind, ed. N. Tranquillo. Vienna Circle 
Institute Library, vol. 3. New York: Springer Verlag, pp. 205–209.
solms, m. (2015a). The Feeling Brain: Selected Papers on Neuropsychoanalysis. 
London: Karnac Books.
Mark Solms
1180
solms, m. (2015b). Reply to Barratt. Psychoanalytic Review 102:209–219.
solms, m. (2017a). “The unconscious” in psychoanalysis and neuroscience: 
An integrated approach to the cognitive unconscious. In Unrepressed 
Unconscious, Implicit Memory, and Clinical Work, ed. G. Craparo & C. 
Mucci. London: Karnac Books, pp. 1–25.
solms, m. (2017b). What is “the unconscious,” and where is it located in the 
brain? A neuropsychoanalytic perspective. Annals of the New York 
Academy of Sciences 1406(1):90–97.
solms, m. (2018a). Depression in neuropsychoanalysis: Why does depression 
feel bad? In Building Bridges: Impact of Psychoanalysis and 
Neuropsychoanalysis on Clinical Sessions, ed. R. Spagnolo. New York: 
Routledge, pp. 39–54.
solms, m. (2018 b). The neurobiological underpinnings of psychoanalytic 
theory and therapy. Frontiers of Behavioral Neuroscience 12:294.
solms, m. (2018c). The scientific standing of psychoanalysis. British Journal 
of Psychiatry International 15:5–8.
solms, m. (2019a). The hard problem of consciousness and the free energy 
principle. Frontiers of Psychology 10:2714.
solms, m. (2019 b). A neuropsychoanalytic perspective. Psychoanalytic 
Inquiry 39:1–18.
solms, m.  (2020). New project for a scientific psychology.  Neuropsychoanalysis 
22:5–35.
solms, m. (2021 a) Dreams and the hard problem of consciousness. In 
Encyclopedia of Behavioral Neuroscience, ed. S. Della Salla. 2nd ed. 
V olume 3. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 678–686.
solms, m. (2021 b). The Hidden Spring: A Journey to the Source of 
Consciousness. New York: Norton.
solms, m. (2021 c). Response to commentaries. Journal of Consciousness 
Studies 28:222–248.
solms, m. (2021 d). Response to Otto Kernberg. Neuropsychoanalysis 
23:115–119.
solms, m. (2022). Revision of Freud’s theory of the biological origin of the 
Oedipus complex. Psychoanalytic Quarterly 90:555–581.
solms, m. (in press). Freud’s error. In The Ego and Id: 100 Years Later, ed. 
F. Busch & N. Delgado. London: Routledge.
solms, m., & Blass, R. (2008). ‘This house believes that the findings of neu-
roscience are consequential for the practice of clinical psychoanalysis.’ 
Oxford-Rules Debate, English Speaking Conference, British 
Psychoanalytical Society.
solms, m., & Blass, R. (2017) . ‘This house believes that neuroscience has 
nothing to contribute to the clinical practise of psychoanalysis.’ Oxford-
Rules Debate, New York Psychoanalytic Society and Institute.
Reply to CommentaRies
1181
solms, m., & HoBson, J.a. (2006) . ‘This house believes that Freud’s dream 
theory should be abandoned.’ Oxford-Rules Debate, 7th Tucson 
Consciousness Conference: Towards a Science of Consciousness. Center 
for Consciousness Studies, University of Arizona.
solms, m., & tuRnBull, o. (2002) . The Brain and the Inner World: An 
Introduction to the Neuroscience of Subjective Experience. New York: 
Other Press.
solms, m., & tuRnBull, o. (2006). To sleep, perchance to REM? The redis-
covered role of emotion and meaning in dreams. In Tall Tales: Popular 
Myths About the Mind and Brain, ed. S. Della Salla. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, pp. 478–500.
Neuroscience Institute and Psychology Department
Private Bag X3
Rondebosch, Western Cape 7701
SOUTH AFRICA
Email: mark.solms@uct.ac.za