Active learning impairments in substance use disorders when 
resolving the explore-exploit dilemma: A replication and 
extension of previous computational modeling results
Samuel Taylor,
Claire A. Lavalley,
Navid Hakimi,
Jennifer L. Stewart,
Maria Ironside,
Haixia Zheng,
Evan White,
Salvador Guinjoan,
Martin P. Paulus,
Ryan Smith
Laureate Institute for Brain Research, Tulsa, OK, USA
Abstract
Background: Substance use disorders (SUDs) represent a major public health risk. Yet, our 
understanding of the mechanisms that maintain these disorders remains incomplete. In a recent 
Corresponding author: Ryan Smith, Laureate Institute for Brain Research, 6655 S Yale Ave, Tulsa, OK 74136, USA, 
rsmith@laureateinstitute.org.
Contributors
Samuel Taylor performed analyses and wrote the initial draft of the manuscript. Claire A. Lavalley and Navid Hakimi performed 
analyses and edited the manuscript. Jennifer L. Stewart, Maria Ironside, Haixia Zheng, Evan White, Salvador Guinjoan, and Martin P. 
Paulus reviewed and edited the manuscript. Ryan Smith performed analyses, reviewed and edited the manuscript, and supervised the 
project. All authors have approved the final article.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review 
of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered 
which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
Conflict of Interest: None of the authors have any conflicts of interest to disclose.
Conflict of Interest
No conflict declared.
Declarations of interest: none
Role of Funding Source
Nothing declared.
Ethical approval: All procedures performed in studies involving human participants were in accordance with the ethical standards of 
the institutional and/or national research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its later amendments or comparable 
ethical standards.
Informed consent: Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants included in the study.
Software Note: All model simulations, model comparison, and parametric empirical Bayes analyses were implemented using standard 
routines (spm_MDP_VB_X.m, spm_BMS.m, spm_dcm_peb.m, spm_dcm_peb_bmc.m) that are available as MATLAB code in the 
latest version of SPM academic software: http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/. For the specific code used to build the three-armed bandit 
task model and fit parameters to data, see: https://github.com/rssmith33/3-armed_bandit_task_model.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 November 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Drug Alcohol Depend. 2023 November 01; 252: 110945. doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2023.110945.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
computational modeling study, we found initial evidence that SUDs are associated with slower 
learning rates from negative outcomes and less value-sensitive choice (low “action precision”), 
which could help explain continued substance use despite harmful consequences.
Methods: Here we aimed to replicate and extend these results in a pre-registered study 
with a new sample of 168 individuals with SUDs and 99 healthy comparisons (HCs). We 
performed the same computational modeling and group comparisons as in our prior report (doi: 
10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2020.108208) to confirm previously observed effects. After completing all 
pre-registered replication analyses, we then combined the previous and current datasets (N = 468) 
to assess whether differences were transdiagnostic or driven by specific disorders.
Results: Replicating prior results, SUDs showed slower learning rates for negative outcomes 
in both Bayesian and frequentist analyses (η2=.02). Previously observed differences in action 
precision were not confirmed. Learning rates for positive outcomes were also similar between 
groups. Logistic regressions including all computational parameters as predictors in the combined 
datasets could differentiate several specific disorders from HCs, but could not differentiate most 
disorders from each other.
Conclusions: These results provide robust evidence that individuals with SUDs have more 
difficulty adjusting behavior in the face of negative outcomes than HCs. They also suggest this 
effect is common across several different SUDs. Future research should examine its neural basis 
and whether learning rates could represent a new treatment target or moderator of treatment 
outcome.
Keywords
substance use disorder; learning rate; active inference; decision-making; computational psychiatry; 
explore-exploit dilemma; reinforcement learning; transdiagnostic; replication; prediction
1. INTRODUCTION
Substance use disorders (SUDs) have devastating mental and physical health consequences 
(1-5), and lead to large societal and financial burden (6). They also show high co-morbidity 
with depression and anxiety disorders, which can be both a cause and consequence of 
substance use (1-3). Yet, our understanding of the mechanisms that lead to substance use, 
and of those that moderate recovery and abstinence, remains poor. Given current relapse 
rates with existing treatments (7), a better understanding of these mechanisms may be 
crucial for identifying effective clinical targets; and they could also offer important insights 
regarding etiology and prevention.
Computational modeling offers a promising approach for characterizing these mechanisms 
in SUDs (8, 9), as it can disentangle processes underlying perception, learning, and decision-
making that may contribute to these disorders (9, 10). A growing body of work has now 
applied this approach – highlighting several computational processes that differ from healthy 
participants and that may relate to vulnerability, severity, and/or treatment outcomes (11, 
12). Much of this work pertains to deficits in “model-based” (i.e., goal-directed, prospective) 
control, which are thought to amplify habitual and impulsive choice (e.g., for recent reviews, 
see (12, 13)). Other studies have also highlighted deficits in computational mechanisms 
Taylor et al. Page 2
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 November 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
subserving perception (particularly with respect to internal bodily states; i.e., interoception 
(14, 15)) and reinforcement learning (e.g., see (16-18)). Thus, this approach has already 
been helpful in elucidating a number of mechanisms that may underlie SUDs.
Building on this body of work, we recently applied a computational approach to examine the 
way individuals with SUDs balance information-seeking and reward-seeking (19). Relative 
to healthy comparisons, modeling revealed slower learning rates for negative outcomes 
across multiple SUDs, as well as faster learning rates for positive outcomes and less precise 
(i.e., less value-sensitive) action selection. This pattern of results was also moderately stable 
when assessed in the same participants one year later (20). These findings suggested that 
substance use might persist despite painful life consequences due to slower learning from 
these negative outcomes. Returns to drug use after improvements in treatment could also be 
caused by imprecise action selection mechanisms (i.e., switching away from actions with 
positive outcomes). In the current pre-registered study (https://osf.io/u3sbg), we assess the 
reliability of these findings in a new, independent sample with similar characteristics to 
those in the original study. The same task and computational analyses were applied, and 
we report which results do and do not replicate. We subsequently extend these results by 
combining the two datasets, providing power to assess whether effects are driven by specific 
SUDs or co-morbid affective disorders or whether they represent a transdiagnostic marker 
across SUDs.
2. METHODS
2.1 Participants
Participants were taken from the confirmatory dataset (N=550) of the larger Tulsa 1000 
(T1000) study (21). All participants from this dataset who met criteria for the planned 
analyses described below were included. The T1000 project recruited a longitudinal 
community sample with dimensional measures designed around the NIMH Research 
Domain Criteria framework. Participants in the confirmatory dataset were recruited 
sequentially and continuously with the exploratory sample used in our prior study. All 
data included here were collected by January of 2019. The sample in total consists of 
1050 individuals, ages 18-55, recruited through radio, electronic media, word-of-mouth, 
and treatment center referrals. Participants were screened through various dimensional 
psychopathology measures, including Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9 (22)) ≥ 10, 
Overall Anxiety Severity and Impairment Scale (OASIS (23)) >= 8, and/or Drug Abuse 
Screening Assessment (DAST-10 (24)) ≥ 3. Healthy comparisons (HCs) did not show 
elevated symptoms on any of the previous measures. Exclusion criteria for participants 
were: (i) positive tests for drug use, (ii) meeting criteria for psychotic, bipolar, or 
obsessive-compulsive disorders, (iii) a history of moderate-to-severe traumatic brain injury, 
neurological disorders, or severe or unstable medical conditions, (iv) active suicidal intent 
or plan, or (v) change in medication dose within 6 weeks. Full inclusion/exclusion criteria 
are reported in (21). The study was approved by the Western Institutional Review Board. 
All participants provided written informed consent prior to completion of the study protocol, 
in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki, and were compensated for participation. 
ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: #NCT02450240.
Taylor et al. Page 3
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 November 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Participants were divided into two groups: participants with one or more SUDs (with or 
without co-morbid anxiety/depression; N = 168) and participants without any mental health 
diagnosis (HCs; N = 99). Diagnoses were determined according to DSM-IV or DSM-5 
criteria using the Mini International Neuropsychiatric Inventory (MINI) (25) and confirmed 
through clinical conferences with a board-certified psychiatrist. Table 1 provides summary 
statistics for demographic and clinical measures, as well as two-sample t-tests assessing 
group differences (and corresponding Bayes factors [BFs], calculated using the BayesFactor 
package in R (26)). Table 2 provides a summary of specific diagnoses within the SUDs 
group. Table S1.1 in Supplementary Materials 1 compares the demographic characteristics 
and clinical measures in this sample to those in our previous study (19). The only difference 
observed was that SUDs in the current sample had lower scores than the previous sample 
on the Wide Range Achievement Test reading score (WRAT) (27), a measure of premorbid 
intelligence (t(253) = 2.27, p = 0.02). This measure was included because of expected 
differences in baseline intellectual functioning relative to HCs.
2.2 Three-Armed Bandit Task
Participants completed a standard three-armed bandit task (28). For 20 blocks of 16 
sequential choices, they had to learn from trial-and-error which of three options was most 
likely to deliver a win (described in detail in our previous study (19); also see (20)). To 
maximize reward in each block, participants needed to strike a balance between sampling 
untested options (exploration) and capitalizing on the options that appeared most rewarding 
(exploitation). Figure 1 shows the task interface and provides additional details.
2.3 Computational Modeling
A detailed computational model description can be found in Table S1.2. In brief, learning 
and choice are implemented by a set of inference and decision rules drawn from the active 
inference framework, which is designed to capture information-seeking under uncertainty. 
A detailed description of the mathematical framework can be found in (29, 30). The task 
model includes a set of observations (e.g., wins/losses), the subjective value assigned to 
those observations, choice states (option 1, 2, and 3), the probabilities of each observation 
under each choice state (e.g., the reward probabilities), and policies (actions) controlling 
transitions between choice states on each trial.
Free parameters within the model offer mechanistic explanations for individual differences 
in choice behavior. These parameters are summarized in Table 3 and shown within the 
learning and choice equations in Figure 1.
We used a standard variational Bayes algorithm (variational Laplace (31)) to find parameter 
estimates that maximize the probability of participant behavior under the model, while also 
minimizing overfitting with a complexity cost (32). We then performed Bayesian model 
comparison (33, 34) across a set of 10 nested model variants (shown in Table S1.3) to 
determine the best model. The estimates from this best model were then used in subsequent 
statistical analyses.
Results of parameter recoverability and model identifiability analyses are reported in 
previous work (20). Parameters show good recoverability across the region of parameter 
Taylor et al. Page 4
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 November 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
space describing participant behavior, and the best-fit model is identifiable within model 
comparison.
2.4 Statistical Analysis Procedure
2.4.1 Primary Replication Analyses— Statistical analyses replicate those in our 
previous study (19) and were pre-registered (https://osf.io/u3sbg). We first ran correlations 
to confirm how model parameter estimates were related to descriptive behavioral measures, 
including number of wins, mean reaction times (RTs) (after trimming using iterative Grubbs 
at a threshold of p < 0.01 (35)), and stay vs. shift behavior after wins vs. losses (i.e., whether 
participants shift to a new option or stay at the current option after a win or loss on the prior 
trial).
Our primary analyses then used parametric empirical Bayes (PEB) (36) to test general linear 
models with each model parameter estimate as the outcome variable, and using age, sex, 
baseline intellectual functioning (WRAT scores), and diagnostic group (SUDs and HCs) 
as predictors. PEB analyses allow incorporation of both posterior parameter means and 
variances when assessing these group-level models, as opposed to using the means alone as 
point estimates.
As in our prior study, secondary frequentist analyses (equivalent t-tests and multiple 
regressions) were also performed to assess group differences in the posterior parameter 
means. Supplementary model comparisons with these regressions, using Bayes factors (BFs) 
to compare the probability of the data under models with different possible combinations of 
predictors, were also performed (see note below Table 4).
For comparison to model-based results, these same analyses were also performed 
on the descriptive behavioral measures. PEB analyses were performed in MATLAB 
(https://matlab.mathworks.com/). All other analyses were performed in R (2018; www.R-
project.org/).
Our previous study employed propensity matching (on the basis of age, sex, and WRAT 
scores; using the optmatch package in R [https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/optmatch/
index.html]), which we initially planned to do here. However, the characteristics of this 
sample, and particularly the minimal overlap in WRAT scores between groups, prohibited 
our matching algorithm from finding a suitable subsample. Consequently, we only report 
analyses on the full sample using linear models that included age, sex, and WRAT as 
covariates. However, due to issues that arose during data collection, 12 HCs and 48 SUDs 
did not have available WRAT scores. In order to capitalize on the full sample, while 
also assessing possible effects of baseline intellectual functioning, we therefore ran each 
planned analysis once in the full sample (without including WRAT scores) and once in 
the subsample with available WRAT scores (while including this measure as a covariate). 
Results of analyses in the full sample are reported in detail below. Results within the 
analyses repeated in the subsample with WRAT scores are provided in detail within 
Supplementary Materials 1 and 2, but we also note important findings here.
Taylor et al. Page 5
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 November 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Given the heterogeneity within our SUDs sample, we also planned to assess potential 
differences in computational parameters between different SUDs – specifically, differences 
between individuals with opioid use disorders and stimulant use disorders. While there was 
a sufficient number of individuals with stimulant use disorders without co-morbid opioid 
use disorders (N = 109), the low number of individuals with opioid use disorders that 
did not have co-morbid stimulant use disorders (N = 10) was too small to permit this 
analysis. However, after completing all pre-registered replication analyses, we combined the 
exploratory and confirmatory samples to examine disorder-specific effects (see section 2.4.3 
and 3.5).
2.4.2 Secondary Analyses— We ran correlations within SUDs to examine the 
relationship between model parameters and dimensional measures of symptom severity. 
Although not pre-registered, we also used t-tests to assess whether model parameters 
differed in medicated vs. unmedicated individuals in the SUDs group.
In addition to the 168 individuals with SUDs described above, the T1000 dataset also 
included 32 participants with an SUD diagnosis that had current symptom levels below the 
DAST ≥ 3 cutoff. These participants were not included in our primary analyses; however, 
they were used in some supplementary analyses described below. For more details about 
these additional participants, and comparison to the main sample, see Table S1.4.
2.4.3 Disorder-Specific Analyses in Combined Samples— After completing all 
pre-registered replication analyses, we combined the exploratory and confirmatory datasets 
(N = 468) to ask questions about narrower diagnostic groups, which the previous or current 
dataset alone provided limited power to answer. Using logistic regressions, we first asked 
whether model parameters could differentiate HCs from those who had each of the specific 
substance use or affective disorders listed in Table 2. These regression models included each 
of the five parameters as predictors of diagnostic status (i.e., coding HCs = 0 and those with 
the specific disorder in question = 1, removing all other participants). We also examined 
those with no co-morbid SUDs when available sample size allowed, but high levels of 
co-morbidity did not permit this in most cases (i.e., only in stimulant use disorders; N = 
55). These were considered post-hoc analyses done primarily to provide additional insights 
regarding whether specific overlapping disorders might drive the confirmed difference 
between HCs and SUDs overall. As such, we did not correct p-values for number of 
regressions; but we note that a Bonferroni correction for 11 regressions would entail a 
threshold of p < .0045. In similar logistic regressions, we then asked whether model 
parameters could differentiate one disorder vs. others (i.e., removing HCs and coding those 
with vs. without the specific disorder in question equal to 1 and 0, respectively).
2.4.4 Predictive Categorization— Finally, to evaluate whether model parameters could 
predictively classify individuals into disorder groups, we trained logistic regression models 
(with the 5 parameters as joint predictors) on the exploratory sample and then assessed 
whether the trained models could accurately categorize individuals as either HCs or 
SUDs, both in general and for each specific SUD or affective disorder separately (i.e., 
HCs = 0, Disorder = 1 in each case, removing those without that the disorder being 
predicted). These predictive categorization analyses were performed using the glm function 
Taylor et al. Page 6
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 November 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
in R (https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/stats/versions/3.6.2/topics/glm). Due to the 
different sample sizes per group, training data were also balanced using frequency weights. 
To assess performance, we report receiver operating characteristic curves (ROCs), reflecting 
the true positive rate (sensitivity) vs. false positive rate (1 - specificity) for different 
categorization thresholds, and the associated area under the curve (AUC). AUCs indicate 
how often a random sample will be assigned to the correct group with higher probability.
3. RESULTS
3.1 Model Validation
The winning model matched that found in our previous study (including action precision, 
reward sensitivity, separate learning rates for wins/losses, and insensitivity to information; 
Table S1.3), with a protected exceedance probability of 1.0. The average probability of 
participant actions under the model was .54 (SD = .11). The model assigned the highest 
probability to participant actions on 64% (SD = .11) of trials (note that chance = 33.33%).
Direct comparison of parameter values between the previous and current sample is provided 
in Table S1.5, with detailed results of associated linear models in Table S2.1 and S2.2 
within Supplementary Materials 2. The parameter values in SUDs did not differ significantly 
between samples, nor were these values different between the two HC samples.
Relationships between model parameters and descriptive measures also replicated prior 
results (see Figure 2). Notable examples included: 1) number of wins was positively 
associated with action precision and reward sensitivity; 2) number of lose/shift choices was 
positively correlated with learning rate for losses; 3) stay choices were positively correlated 
with reward sensitivity and insensitivity to information; and 4) RTs were longer in those 
with slower learning rates for losses and faster in those with greater learning rates for 
wins, reward sensitivity, and insensitivity to information. The relationships with RTs are 
noteworthy, as model parameters are not fit to this aspect of behavior (i.e., the model itself 
does not simulate RTs).
3.2 Group comparison
Replicating our prior results, PEB models with age and sex as covariates found strong 
evidence for group differences in learning rate for losses (slower in SUDs; posterior 
probability [pp] = 0.93; see Figure 3). These models also revealed some evidence for 
differences in reward sensitivity (greater in HCs; pp = 0.82). Note, however, that this 
latter finding was not present in our prior study. Including WRAT reading scores (in the 
subsample for which they were available) did not change these results (see Figure S1.1). See 
the Additional Effects section within Supplementary Materials 1 for further effects observed 
in relation to age, sex, and WRAT scores.
As further assessment of successful replication, we also compared parameter estimates from 
the exploratory sample in our prior study to those in the present study for each group. We 
further computed BFs from Bayesian t-tests for each parameter/group to assess evidence 
for differences between samples. As shown in Figure 3, these BFs ranged from .14 to .38, 
indicating that the data are between 2.6 and 7.1 times more likely under a model with no 
Taylor et al. Page 7
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 November 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
difference between samples. This provides strong evidence that the new sample successfully 
replicates the findings in our prior study. Analogous results for the subsample with available 
WRAT scores are shown in Figure S1.1.
Effect sizes for parameter differences between groups were also comparable between the 
exploratory and confirmatory samples, with the exception of action precision and learning 
rate for wins (learning rate for losses: Exploratory, d = .27, Confirmatory, d = .29; learning 
rate for wins: Exploratory, d = 23, Confirmatory, d = .13; reward sensitivity: Exploratory, d = 
.12, Confirmatory d = .14; information insensitivity: Exploratory, d = .18, Confirmatory, d = 
.20; action precision: Exploratory, d = .60, Confirmatory, d = .17).
3.3 Supporting frequentist analyses
In complementary frequentist analyses, initial two-sample t-tests for each parameter 
confirmed the group difference in learning rates for losses (t(265) = 2.26, p = 0.02, d = 
0.29), but did not support differences in any other parameter. Table 4 reports results of 
subsequent regressions in the full sample analogous to the PEB models above, assessing 
whether age and sex could account for observed group differences. Equivalent Bayesian 
regressions were also used to identify the model (combination of predictors) for which 
the data provided the most evidence and how this compared to models either adding or 
removing potential group effects (see note below Table 4). Here we observed the same 
expected effects of group on learning rates for losses (lower values in SUDs).
Results of identical analyses on descriptive behavioral measures are reported in Table 5. We 
found greater wins in HCs than SUDs (p = 0.047; see Table 7 and Figure 3), as found in 
our prior study. We also found fewer win/stay choices in SUDs, which was not observed 
previously. As in our prior study, we also repeated these analyses for the first and second 
halves of each task block separately (i.e., first 7 choices vs. subsequent choices) to assess 
periods where exploration vs. exploitation would be expected to dominate, respectively (see 
Tables S1.8). This showed that the SUDs group only made fewer win/stay choices than HCs 
in the second half of each game (p = .02; and greater win/shifts, p = .04), while HCs only 
showed greater wins in the first half of each game (p = .007). Post-hoc analyses of choice 
convergence (i.e., average number of choices until the same choice was made at least 5 
times) did not show differences between groups (see Supplementary Materials 1). Additional 
relationships observed between age or sex and these measures are reported in Table S2.3 and 
S2.4 and summarized in the Additional Effects section of Supplementary Materials 1.
In most cases, similar results were seen in the subsample with WRAT scores (see Tables 
S1.6-8). The major exception was that this subsample did find higher action precision in 
HCs than SUDs, similar to our initial study. Evidence for the difference in learning rates for 
losses was also weaker in this subsample, but it was retained within the winning model in 
model comparison (BF = 2.93).
3.4 Relationships with symptoms
Relationships between model parameters and symptom measures in SUDs are reported 
in Figure S1.2. No significant relationships were observed, which failed to replicate 
Taylor et al. Page 8
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 November 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
the relationships observed in our previous study between PHQ/OASIS and information 
insensitivity, and between OASIS and reward sensitivity (BFs also provided moderate 
evidence against these relationships: 0.18 – 0.53).
When comparing the main sample of SUDs to the 32 diagnosed individuals with symptom 
severity below the cutoff of DAST ≥ 3, we found no differences in parameter values (see 
Table S1.4).
Comparison of those that were vs. were not on medication in the SUDs group revealed no 
significant differences for any model parameter (ts between −1.32 and .86, ps between .188 
and .838).
3.5 Analysis of specific use disorders in combined samples
Summary statistics for computational parameters in specific disorder groups within the 
combined exploratory and confirmatory samples (N = 468) are shown in Table S1.9. 
Full results of the logistic regression models differentiating whether participants had each 
specific disorder relative to HCs are shown in Table S1.10. Accounting for other model 
parameters, these analyses found that action precision separately differentiated diagnostic 
status relative to HCs for those with each specific substance use and affective disorder (Wald 
z between −4.63 and −2.03, ps between < .001 and .042), with the exception of hallucinogen 
use disorder and PTSD. This was also true for those with stimulant use disorder without 
co-morbidities (z = −3.05, p = .002). Learning rates for wins separately predicted diagnostic 
status relative to HCs for those with stimulant use disorder (only marginally in those without 
co-morbidities; p = .079), opioid use disorder, sedative use disorder, major depressive 
disorder, and social anxiety disorder (z between −3.2 and −1.96, ps between .001 and .049). 
Learning rates for losses further predicted diagnostic status relative to HCs for those with 
the majority of specific disorders (including stimulant use disorders without co-morbidities; 
z between −3.57 and −2.08, ps between < .001 and .038), with the exception of hallucinogen 
use disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, or PTSD.
Full results of the logistic regression models predicting whether participants in the SUDs 
group had a specific disorder relative to other disorders are shown in Table S1.11. 
Accounting for other model parameters, these analyses found that greater action precision 
and faster learning rate for wins predicted diagnosis with stimulant use disorders vs. other 
disorders (z = 2.47 and 2.23, p = .014 and .026, respectively; and a marginal effect of 
learning rates for losses: z = 1.79, p = .073). Diagnosis with social anxiety disorder was 
also predicted by slower learning rates for wins relative to other disorders (z = −1.97, p 
= .049; and a marginal effect of learning rates for losses: z = −1.71, p = .09). Otherwise, 
model parameters did not differentiate between specific SUDs. Aside from social anxiety 
and learning rate for wins, they also did not indicate differences in SUDs with vs. without 
affective disorders for any model parameter.
The overall variance explained by the 5 parameters in significant logistic regression models 
ranged from 9% to 16% (based on pseudo-R2; for details, see Table S1.10). Figure 4 
shows parameter values for those with each specific disorder and indicates which could be 
differentiated with the logistic regressions.
Taylor et al. Page 9
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 November 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Subsequent multiple regressions, analyzing whether symptom severity (DAST, PHQ, 
OASIS) scores could be predicted by model parameters for those with each specific disorder, 
revealed a number of effects. Higher reward sensitivity predicted: lower OASIS scores 
in cannabis and alcohol use disorders, lower PHQ scores in GAD, and greater DAST 
scores in panic disorder. Higher learning rate for wins predicted higher PHQ scores in 
MDD and SAD. Higher action precision predicted greater OASIS scores in MDD, and 
higher information insensitivity predicted lower PHQ scores in those with stimulant use 
disorders only. However, none of these results survived correction for multiple comparisons 
(uncorrected ps between .005 and .048; for detailed statistics, see Supplementary Materials).
3.6 Predictive categorization
Results of predictive categorization analyses (ROCs, AUCs, accuracy, and confusion 
matrices) for specific disorders are shown in Figure 5. When tested on the confirmatory 
dataset, logistic regression models trained on the exploratory dataset varied in predictive 
classification accuracy (relative to HCs) between .55 and .66, depending on the 
specific disorder in question. AUCs ranged from .6 to .7, indicating poor to acceptable 
discrimination. When categorizing HCs vs. all individuals with SUDs together, accuracy 
= .63 and AUC = .66. Subsequent analyses either removing each parameter from the full 
model (while retaining the others; see Table S1.12), or sequentially adding each parameter 
(see Table S1.13), indicated greater AUCs when incorporating action precision and learning 
rates, but not when including the reward sensitivity or information insensitivity parameters, 
suggesting they did not uniquely contribute to successful prediction. However, AUCs 
remained above chance (.59 - .62) when only these two parameters were included.
4. DISCUSSION
In this study, we found confirmatory evidence that substance users show selectively slower 
learning rates than HCs for negative outcomes. In contrast, previously observed differences 
in action precision and learning rates for positive outcomes did not replicate for most 
analyses in this new sample (with the exception of action precision in supplementary 
frequentist analyses accounting for WRAT scores). These results suggest SUDs may learn 
from positive outcomes in a manner more similar to HCs than suggested in our previous 
study, and that differences in action precision may only apply to specific subpopulations – 
which will need to be addressed in future research. Also notable was the reduced reward 
sensitivity (suggesting greater directed exploration) observed within SUDs in the current 
sample, which was not observed in our prior study.
Subsequent logistic regressions across participants in the exploratory and confirmatory 
samples showed that both action precision and learning rates for losses (and in some cases 
learning rates for wins) could jointly differentiate the presence of most specific substance 
use and affective disorders relative to HCs. This highlights the way a multi-dimensional 
computational phenotype can offer categorical information not available from summary 
statistics or a single parameter alone. In contrast, analogous logistic regressions found 
that most disorders could not be differentiated from one another, except for stimulant use 
disorders (which showed greater action precision and faster learning rates for wins relative 
Taylor et al. Page 10
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 November 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
to other disorders) and social anxiety disorder (slower learning rates for wins relative 
to other disorders). When considering co-morbid affective disorders, this general lack of 
differentiability further indicated, for example, that learning rates for losses and action 
precision did not differ in SUDs with vs. without MDD or anxiety disorders.
When logistic regressions were instead trained on the exploratory sample and tested on 
their ability to correctly categorize HCs vs. specific disorders in the confirmatory sample, 
performance was above chance but ranged from poor to acceptable discrimination across 
specific disorders. Thus, while the group differences we observed may offer important 
mechanistic insights, their potential clinical utility for diagnostic purposes should not be 
overstated.
Overall, these results provide strong evidence that the differences we observed in SUDs 
are transdiagnostic. They also provide added support for the hypothesis that individuals 
with SUDs adjust their behavior more slowly in the face of aversive outcomes, which 
could help explain continued drug use despite harmful effects. This is also supported 
by previous literature showing reduced sensitivity to negative outcomes (or to affective 
stimuli generally) in this population within other contexts (e.g., (18, 38-49)). Given this 
replication, there are now several future directions that should be considered. One important 
question, for example, is whether this difference is caused by substance use or whether it 
represents a pre-existing vulnerability factor. Answering this question will likely require 
longitudinal analyses of at-risk populations, as well as assessing potential relationships with 
pre-existing biological and psychological risk-factors. Another important topic to address 
will be whether this difference is affected by treatment and covaries with symptom severity. 
Randomized controlled trials assessing the effects of distinct treatments on learning rates 
will be necessary to shed light on this question. Additionally, neuroimaging studies designed 
to identify the neural correlates of these learning rate differences could highlight potential 
biological targets. Finally, it will be important to identify whether learning rates moderate 
treatment outcomes. In relation to this last point, we recently reported a 1-year follow-up 
study in our previous sample and unexpectedly found that slower learning rates for losses 
at baseline predicted greater symptom improvement in stimulant users at 1-year follow-
up (20). Here we suggested that, despite potentially reducing learning from the harmful 
outcomes of drug use, this difference might also attenuate reactions to unpleasant aspects of 
the recovery process and facilitate adherence. However, as it was not an expected result, we 
aim to replicate this longitudinal effect in future work. If confirmed, it could indicate one 
concrete way in which measures of learning rate differences could be clinically informative.
Some remaining limitations are important to consider. First, our sample of SUDs was a 
heterogenous community sample from a particular region of the United States, the great 
majority of which were stimulant users, which may have limited our ability to detect 
effects specific to some substances and not others (with the exception of a moderate 
number of stimulant users that did not have co-morbidities in the combined sample), or 
to generalize findings to substance users in other regional or cultural contexts. It was also a 
treatment-seeking, abstinent sample, and thus may not generalize to non-treatment-seeking 
individuals. Many substance users also had affective disorders. However, parameters did 
not correlate with depression/anxiety symptoms and, with the exception of social anxiety 
Taylor et al. Page 11
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 November 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
disorder (slower learning rate for wins), model parameters in the combined sample could 
not differentiate SUDs with vs. without affective disorders. Another possible limitation 
worth noting is that, since the task instructed participants to avoid losses, relatively fewer 
loss trials were available for analysis (i.e., roughly 181 wins vs. 139 losses on average), 
with slightly fewer losses in HCs than SUDs (see Table 5). It is therefore possible that 
estimates for learning rates for losses may have been less precise than those for wins. 
In addition, as the task only contrasts two outcomes (wins/losses), it is unable to fully 
differentiate learning from unexpected outcomes and negative outcomes per se. For example, 
substance users might also show slower learning rates for a task with small vs. large 
wins, suggesting less willingness than HCs to abandon a policy in the face of unexpected 
outcomes more generally, as opposed to doing so in response to losses in particular. Future 
studies contrasting large vs. small gains and large vs. small losses will be necessary to fully 
address this remaining question. Finally, the correct interpretation is less clear for results 
that were significant in the previous or current sample, but not both (e.g., with respect 
to reduced action precision and reward sensitivity in SUDs). Future studies will therefore 
need to examine whether inconsistent results between samples are better understood as false 
positives in one sample or false negatives in the other.
In summary, this study lends added confidence to the generalizability of previous results 
suggesting slower learning from negative outcomes in SUDs and motivates a number of 
future directions to test the neurobiological basis of this difference and whether it might 
represent, for example, a pre-existing vulnerability factor, a predictor of treatment response, 
an objective severity marker, and/or a novel intervention target. These represent important 
next steps toward evaluating the clinical utility of this potentially important individual 
difference.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgment
This study was supported by the Laureate Institute for Brain Research.
Funding:
This work was funded by the NIGMS (P20 GM121312; PI:MPP) and the Laureate Institute for Brain Research.
References
1. Darke S, Kaye S, McKetin R, Duflou J. Major physical and psychological harms of 
methamphetamine use. Drug Alcohol Rev. 2008;27(3):253–62. [PubMed: 18368606] 
2. Zweben JE, Cohen JB, Christian D, Galloway GP, Salinardi M, Parent D, et al. Psychiatric 
symptoms in methamphetamine users. Am J Addict. 2004;13(2):181–90. [PubMed: 15204668] 
3. May AC, Aupperle RL, Stewart JL. Dark Times: The Role of Negative Reinforcement in 
Methamphetamine Addiction. Front Psychiatry. 2020;11:114. [PubMed: 32256392] 
4. Darke S, Kaye S, Duflou J, Lappin J. Completed Suicide Among Methamphetamine Users: A 
National Study. Suicide Life Threat Behav. 2019;49(1):328–37. [PubMed: 29444345] 
Taylor et al. Page 12
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 November 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
5. Glasner-Edwards S, Mooney LJ, Marinelli-Casey P, Hillhouse M, Ang A, Rawson RA, et al. 
Psychopathology in methamphetamine-dependent adults 3 years after treatment. Drug Alcohol Rev. 
2010;29(1):12–20. [PubMed: 20078677] 
6. Goplerud E, Hodge S, Benham T. A Substance Use Cost Calculator for US Employers With an 
Emphasis on Prescription Pain Medication Misuse. J Occup Environ Med. 2017;59(11):1063–71. 
[PubMed: 29116987] 
7. Brecht ML, Herbeck D. Time to relapse following treatment for methamphetamine use: a long-
term perspective on patterns and predictors. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2014;139:18–25. [PubMed: 
24685563] 
8. Smith R, Taylor S, Bilek E. Computational mechanisms of addiction: recent evidence and its 
relevance to addiction medicine. Current Addiction Reports. 2021:(In Press).
9. Huys QJ, Maia TV , Frank MJ. Computational psychiatry as a bridge from neuroscience to clinical 
applications. Nat Neurosci. 2016;19(3):404–13. [PubMed: 26906507] 
10. Wilson R, Geana A, White J, Ludvig E, Cohen J. Humans use directed and random exploration to 
solve the explore-exploit dilemma. Journal of experimental psychology General. 2014;143:2074–
81. [PubMed: 25347535] 
11. Mollick JA, Kober H. Computational models of drug use and addiction: A review. J Abnorm 
Psychol. 2020;129(6):544–55. [PubMed: 32757599] 
12. Smith R, Taylor S, Bilek E. Computational mechanisms of addiction: recent evidence and its 
relevance to addiction medicine. Current Addiction Reports. 2021;8:509–19.
13. Valyan A, Ekhtiari H, Smith R, Paulus MP. Decision-making deficits in substance use disorders. In: 
Verdejo-Garcia A, editor. Cognition and Addiction: Academic Press; 2020. p. 25–61.
14. Smith R, Kuplicki R, Feinstein J, Forthman KL, Stewart JL, Paulus MP, et al. A Bayesian 
computational model reveals a failure to adapt interoceptive precision estimates across depression, 
anxiety, eating, and substance use disorders. PLoS Computational Biology. 2020;16(12):e1008484. 
[PubMed: 33315893] 
15. Smith R, Feinstein JS, Kuplicki R, Forthman KL, Stewart JL, Paulus MP, et al. Perceptual 
insensitivity to the modulation of interoceptive signals in depression, anxiety, and substance use 
disorders. Sci Rep. 2021;11(1):2108. [PubMed: 33483527] 
16. Myers CE, Sheynin J, Balsdon T, Luzardo A, Beck KD, Hogarth L, et al. Probabilistic reward- and 
punishment-based learning in opioid addiction: Experimental and computational data. Behav Brain 
Res. 2016;296:240–8. [PubMed: 26381438] 
17. Kanen JW, Ersche KD, Fineberg NA, Robbins TW, Cardinal RN. Computational modelling reveals 
contrasting effects on reinforcement learning and cognitive flexibility in stimulant use disorder 
and obsessive-compulsive disorder: remediating effects of dopaminergic D2/3 receptor agents. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2019;236(8):2337–58. [PubMed: 31324936] 
18. Konova AB, Lopez-Guzman S, Urmanche A, Ross S, Louie K, Rotrosen J, et al. Computational 
Markers of Risky Decision-making for Identification of Temporal Windows of Vulnerability to 
Opioid Use in a Real-world Clinical Setting. JAMA Psychiatry. 2020;77(4):368–77. [PubMed: 
31812982] 
19. Smith R, Schwartenbeck P, Stewart JL, Kuplicki R, Ekhtiari H, Investigators T, et al. Imprecise 
Action Selection in Substance Use Disorder: Evidence for Active Learning Impairments 
When Solving the Explore-exploit Dilemma. Drug and Alcohol Dependence. 2020;215:108208. 
[PubMed: 32801113] 
20. Smith R, Taylor S, Stewart JL, Guinjoan SM, Ironside M, Kirlic N, et al. Slower Learning Rates 
from Negative Outcomes in Substance Use Disorder over a 1-Year Period and Their Potential 
Predictive Utility. Computational Psychiatry. 2022;6(1):117–41.
21. Victor TA, Khalsa SS, Simmons WK, Feinstein JS, Savitz J, Aupperle RL, et al. Tulsa 1000: a 
naturalistic study protocol for multilevel assessment and outcome prediction in a large psychiatric 
sample. BMJ open. 2018;8(1):e016620.
22. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB. The PHQ-9: validity of a brief depression severity measure. J 
Gen Intern Med. 2001;16(9):606–13. [PubMed: 11556941] 
Taylor et al. Page 13
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 November 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
23. Norman SB, Hami Cissell S, Means-Christensen AJ, Stein MB. Development and validation of an 
overall anxiety severity and impairment scale (OASIS). Depression and Anxiety. 2006;23(4):245–
9. [PubMed: 16688739] 
24. Bohn M, Babor T, Kranzler H. Validity of the Drug Abuse Screening Test (DAST-10) in inpatient 
substance abusers. Problems of drug dependence. 1991;119:233–5.
25. Sheehan D, Janavs J, Baker R, Sheehan KH, Knapp E, Sheehan M. The MINI international 
neuropsychiatric interview–version 7.0. Jacksonville, FL: Medical Outcomes System Inc.; 2015.
26. Morey RD, Rouder JN. BayesFactor (Version 0.9.10-2)[Computer software]. 2015.
27. Johnstone B, Callahan CD, Kapila CJ, Bouman DE. The comparability of the WRAT-R reading 
test and NAART as estimates of premorbid intelligence in neurologically impaired patients. Arch 
Clin Neuropsychol. 1996;11(6):513–9. [PubMed: 14588456] 
28. Zhang S, Yu AJ. Forgetful Bayes and myopic planning: Human learning and decision-making in a 
bandit setting. Advances in neural information processing systems. 2013:2607–15.
29. Da Costa L, Parr T, Sajid N, Veselic S, Neacsu V , Friston K. Active inference on discrete 
state-spaces: A synthesis. J Math Psychol. 2020;99:102447. [PubMed: 33343039] 
30. Friston K, Parr T, de Vries B. The graphical brain: Belief propagation and active inference. 
Network Neuroscience. 2017;1:381–414. [PubMed: 29417960] 
31. Friston K, Mattout J, Trujillo-Barreto N, Ashburner J, Penny W. Variational free energy and the 
Laplace approximation. Neuroimage. 2007;34(1):220–34. [PubMed: 17055746] 
32. Schwartenbeck P, Friston K. Computational Phenotyping in Psychiatry: A Worked Example. 
eNeuro. 2016;3(4):ENEURO.0049-16.2016.
33. Rigoux L, Stephan KE, Friston KJ, Daunizeau J. Bayesian model selection for group studies - 
revisited. Neuroimage. 2014;84:971–85. [PubMed: 24018303] 
34. Stephan KE, Penny WD, Daunizeau J, Moran RJ, Friston KJ. Bayesian model selection for group 
studies. Neuroimage. 2009;46(4):1004–17. [PubMed: 19306932] 
35. Grubbs F. Procedures for detecting outlying observations in samples. Technometrics. 
1969;11(1):1–21.
36. Friston KJ, Litvak V , Oswal A, Razi A, Stephan KE, van Wijk BCM, et al. Bayesian 
model reduction and empirical Bayes for group (DCM) studies. Neuroimage. 2016;128:413–31. 
[PubMed: 26569570] 
37. Hosmer DW Jr., Lemeshow S, Sturdivant RS. Applied Logistic Regression, Third Edition: John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc.; 2013.
38. Smith R, Kirlic N, Stewart JL, Touthang J, Kuplicki R, Khalsa SS, et al. Greater decision 
uncertainty characterizes a transdiagnostic patient sample during approach-avoidance conflict: a 
computational modelling approach. Journal of Psychiatry & Neuroscience. 2021;46(1):E74–E87. 
[PubMed: 33119490] 
39. Smith R, Kirlic N, Stewart JL, Touthang J, Kuplicki R, McDermott TJ, et al. Long-term stability 
of computational parameters during approach-avoidance conflict in a transdiagnostic psychiatric 
patient sample. Scientific Reports. 2021;11(1):11783. [PubMed: 34083701] 
40. Genauck A, Quester S, Wustenberg T, Morsen C, Heinz A, Romanczuk-Seiferth N. Reduced 
loss aversion in pathological gambling and alcohol dependence is associated with differential 
alterations in amygdala and prefrontal functioning. Sci Rep. 2017;7(1):16306. [PubMed: 
29176580] 
41. Fridberg DJ, Queller S, Ahn WY , Kim W, Bishara AJ, Busemeyer JR, et al. Cognitive Mechanisms 
Underlying Risky Decision-Making in Chronic Cannabis Users. J Math Psychol. 2010;54(1):28–
38. [PubMed: 20419064] 
42. Ahn WY , Vasilev G, Lee SH, Busemeyer JR, Kruschke JK, Bechara A, et al. Decision-making in 
stimulant and opiate addicts in protracted abstinence: evidence from computational modeling with 
pure users. Front Psychol. 2014;5:849. [PubMed: 25161631] 
43. Lopez-Guzman S, Konova AB, Glimcher PW. Computational psychiatry of impulsivity and risk: 
how risk and time preferences interact in health and disease. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 
2019;374(1766):20180135. [PubMed: 30966919] 
Taylor et al. Page 14
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 November 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
44. Beylergil SB, Beck A, Deserno L, Lorenz RC, Rapp MA, Schlagenhauf F, et al. Dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex contributes to the impaired behavioral adaptation in alcohol dependence. 
Neuroimage Clin. 2017;15:80–94. [PubMed: 28491495] 
45. Gowin JL, Mackey S, Paulus MP. Altered risk-related processing in substance users: imbalance of 
pain and gain. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2013;132(1-2):13–21. [PubMed: 23623507] 
46. Simons JS, Dvorak RD, Batien BD. Methamphetamine use in a rural college population: 
associations with marijuana use, sensitivity to punishment, and sensitivity to reward. Psychol 
Addict Behav. 2008;22(3):444–9. [PubMed: 18778139] 
47. Simons JS, Arens AM. Moderating effects of sensitivity to punishment and sensitivity to 
reward on associations between marijuana effect expectancies and use. Psychol Addict Behav. 
2007;21(3):409–14. [PubMed: 17874892] 
48. Stewart JL, May AC, Poppa T, Davenport PW, Tapert SF, Paulus MP. You are the danger: 
attenuated insula response in methamphetamine users during aversive interoceptive decision-
making. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2014;142:110–9. [PubMed: 24993186] 
49. Hester R, Bell RP, Foxe JJ, Garavan H. The influence of monetary punishment on cognitive control 
in abstinent cocaine-users. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2013;133(1):86–93. [PubMed: 23791040] 
Taylor et al. Page 15
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 November 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Highlights
• Previous work identified two computational mechanisms associated with 
substance use
• These included altered learning rates and less precise action selection
• This pre-registered study replicates the slower learning rates observed for 
losses
• This mechanism was affected across many specific substance use disorders
• These confirmed computational differences may point to novel treatment 
targets
Taylor et al. Page 16
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 November 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 1: 
Upper Left: Screenshot of the task interface. In each block (N = 20), there were 16 trials 
where participants could choose the left, middle, or right options (buttons 1, 2, or 3 at 
the bottom). Each choice could lead to either a win (green circle) or a loss (red circle), 
which would appear above the chosen option. Left: A graphical depiction of the task 
model. Shaded circles denote inferred variables on each trial. White circles denote fixed 
model parameters. Arrows indicate dependencies between variables (see Table S1.2 for a 
detailed explanation). Right: Model equations for learning and choice. Reward probabilities 
were encoded in a matrix A; i.e., p(ot
reward
) ∣ st). Approximate beliefs about these reward 
probabilities, q(A), were updated within a matrix a; i.e., q(ot
reward
) ∣ st). This matrix included 
a Dirichlet distribution over reward probabilities, the concentration parameters (ai,j) of 
which were updated after each observation according to the specified learning rule (shown 
in the top-left box, which includes the learning rate η). Policy values were based on 
expected free energy (Gπ), which favors policies that are expected to maximize both reward 
(encoded in C) and information gain (i.e., the magnitude of expected change in beliefs about 
reward probabilities [q(A)] after a new observation). Randomness in action selection given 
approximate posteriors over policies, q(π), was controlled by an action precision parameter 
α (note that σ indicates a softmax function). All free parameters in the model are shown in 
red.
Taylor et al. Page 17
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 November 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 2: 
Correlations (and associated Bayes factors) between model parameter values and descriptive 
behavioral measures.
Taylor et al. Page 18
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 November 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 3: 
The top-left panel depicts results from Parametric Empirical Bayes (PEB) analyses showing 
the posterior means and credible intervals for effects of group (when accounting effects 
of age and sex). Positive values indicate greater values in HCs relative to SUDs. Learning 
rates are estimated/displayed in logit space, while all other parameters are in log space. 
Results replicate the group difference in learning rate for losses found in our prior study. 
All other panels compare the means and standard errors for each parameter in our prior 
study (exploratory sample; 54 HCs, 147 SUDs) to those in the current study (confirmatory 
sample; 99 HCs, 168 SUDs), when separating parameters by group. Also shown are Bayes 
factors (BFs) evaluating the evidence for differences between the two samples (BF < 1 
indicates greater evidence for the absence of a difference). BFs indicated that the data were 
between 2.6 and 7.1 times more likely under a model with no difference between samples. 
For an identical plot restricting analyses to participants with available WRAT reading scores 
(and including these scores as predictors in the PEB analyses), see Supplementary Figure 
S1.1, which shows the same overall pattern of results (and in some cases shows stronger 
consistency between samples; most notably with action precision values).
Taylor et al. Page 19
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 November 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 4. 
Comparison of HCs and subsets of individuals with specific SUDs/affective disorders within 
the combined exploratory and confirmatory samples (sample size per group is indicated 
within each bar; based on the groupings detailed in Table 2). Red stars indicate that, in 
logistic regressions, model parameters could predict whether individuals were HCs or had a 
specific disorder (i.e., removing individuals from analyses without the disorder in question; 
*p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001). Blue stars indicate that model parameters could further 
predict whether an individual had one disorder relative to other disorders (i.e., removing 
HCs from analyses). Statistical results are reported in Tables S1.10-S1.11. For a similar 
plot of general task performance (number of wins) by specific disorder group, see Figure 
S1.3. Legend: Stim. Only = stimulant use disorders without co-morbidities, Can. = cannabis 
use disorders, Op. = opioid use disorders, Alc. = alcohol use disorders, Sed. = sedative 
Taylor et al. Page 20
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 November 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
use disorders, Hal. = hallucinogen use disorders, SAD = social anxiety disorder, PTSD = 
post-traumatic stress disorders.
Taylor et al. Page 21
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 November 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 5. 
Results of logistic regression models trained on the exploratory sample and then tested 
on the confirmatory sample (classifying individuals as HCs vs. having a specific SUD 
or affective disorder). Receiver operating characteristic curves (ROCs) illustrate the true 
positive rate (sensitivity) vs. false positive rate (1 - specificity) for different categorization 
thresholds. Performance is quantified by associated area-under-the-curve (AUC) scores, 
reflecting how often a random sample will be assigned to the correct group with higher 
probability. Acceptable AUCs vary by application, but the following heuristic cutoff values 
have been proposed: 0.5 = No discrimination, 0.5-0.7 = Poor discrimination, 0.7-0.8 = 
Taylor et al. Page 22
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 November 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Acceptable discrimination, 0.8-0.9= Excellent discrimination, and > 0.9 = Outstanding 
discrimination (37). Accuracy at a neutral threshold of 0.5 is also shown. Confusion matrices 
for each disorder (0 = HCs, 1 = Disorder) illustrate the numbers of accurate and inaccurate 
classifications for each group based on this criterion. Note that training data were balanced 
using frequency weights prior to training. Gen. Anxiety = Generalized Anxiety Disorder; 
Soc. Anxiety = Social Anxiety Disorder.
Taylor et al. Page 23
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 November 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Taylor et al. Page 24
Table 1:
Demographic and Clinical Characteristics
HCs SUDs Test p-value BF*
N = 99 168
Age 32.29 (11.08) 33.75 (8.34) t(265) = −1.22
d = 0.15
0.22 0.28
Sex (Male) 39 (39.4%) 63 (37.5%) χ2(1) = 0.031
v = 0.01
0.86 0.30
DAST 0.1 (0.33) 7.9 (1.81) t(265) = −42.33
d = 5.2
< 0.001 > 1000
PHQ 1.22 (1.94) 7.89 (6.58) t(265) = −9.84
d = 1.21
< 0.001 > 1000
OASIS 1.19 (1.91) 6.36 (4.51) t(265) = −10.84
d = 1.33
< 0.001 > 1000
WRAT** 62.95 (5.33) 56.67 (6.74) t(205) = 7.21
d = 1.01
< 0.001 > 1000
Psychiatric Medication 0 (0%) 95 (56.5%) NA NA NA
DAST = Drug Abuse Screening Test. PHQ = Patient Health Questionnaire. OASIS = Overall Anxiety Severity and Impairment Scale. WRAT = 
Wide Range Achievement Test reading score. Effect sizes: d = Cohen’s d; v = Cramer’s v.
*For unfamiliar readers, Bayes factors (BFs) here indicate the ratio of the probability of the data under a model with vs. without a group difference 
(e.g., BF = .5 indicates that data are twice as likely without a group difference, while BF = 3 indicates that data are three times as likely under a 
model with a group difference).
**As mentioned in the text, some participants were missing WRAT scores – consequently, the Ns for this row are 87 HCs and 120 SUDs.
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 November 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Taylor et al. Page 25
Table 2:
Lifetime DSM-IV/DSM-5 Psychiatric Diagnoses within SUDs
Note: Two individuals who met the inclusion threshold (DAST > 3) in the exploratory sample had polysubstance dependence and MDD. These 
individuals are reflected in the total counts, but not in specific SUD cell counts. GAD = Generalized Anxiety Disorder; MDD = Major Depressive 
Disorder; PTSD = Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder; Halluc. = Hallucinogens; Stimulants = Amphetamines, Methamphetamines, and/or Cocaine.
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 November 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Taylor et al. Page 26
Table 3:
Free Model Parameters
Free Parameter 
Name
Variable Description
Action Precision α Controls the degree of randomness in behavior – lower values indicate that a participant is less likely to 
exhibit consistent choices in the same decision context (i.e., under the same expected reward probabilities). 
This stochasticity is associated with a random exploration strategy (information gathering via random 
sampling), but it can also index overarching decision uncertainty or insensitivity to the relative value of each 
option.
Reward 
Sensitivity
Cr Indicates the subjective value of a win. Lower values lead to the prioritization of information-seeking, 
promoting goal-based (directed) exploration.
Learning Rate η Reflects the magnitude with which beliefs about reward probabilities are updated after each observation. 
This can be split into separate learning rates for observed wins and losses, reflecting the fact that participants 
can be more sensitive to wins or losses as sources of information in updating beliefs.
Information 
Insensitivity
α0 Encodes the base levels of confidence in beliefs about reward probabilities before making initial choices 
at the start of each block. Higher values lead to reduced directed exploration. They also effectively slow 
learning, as observed wins/losses have a reduced impact on the normalized belief distribution over reward 
probabilities.
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 November 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Taylor et al. Page 27
Table 4:
Parameter values (mean and SD) and group comparison
Parameter HCs SUDs Coefficients
& t-values
p-
value
Partial
η2 BF*
N = 99 168
Action Precision 2.61 (1.06) 2.38 (1.48) b = −0.2; t(263) = −1.2 0.23 0.01 Best Model (M1): Age (BF = 0.47)
M2: Age + Group (BF = 0.08)
Reward 
Sensitivity
4.67 (1.87) 4.43 (1.68) b = −0.32; t(263) = −1.47 0.14 0.01 Best Model (M1): Age (BF = 562.51)
M2: Age + Group (BF = 29.76)
Learning Rate 
(Wins)
0.48 (0.14) 0.5 (0.15) b = 0.02; t(263) = 0.85 0.4 0.00 Best Model (M1): Age (BF = 10.03)
M2: Age + Group (BF = 0.27)
Learning Rate 
(Losses)
0.41 (0.14) 0.37 (0.16) b = −0.04; t(263) = −2.09 0.04 0.02 Best Model (M1): Age + Group (BF = 
13.68)
M2: Age (BF = 13)
Information 
Insensitivity
0.77 (0.33) 0.83 (0.29) b = 0.05; t(263) = 1.41 0.16 0.01 Best Model (M1): Age (BF = 3.23)
M2: Age + Group (BF = 0.17)
Note: Inferential statistics reported here are based on linear models including age and sex as covariates. For analogous results in the subsample with 
available WRAT scores (including WRAT as an additional covariate), see Supplementary Table S1.6.
*These Bayes factors reflect comparisons of evidence for models that did or did not include each possible combination of predictors (i.e., main 
effects of age, sex, group, and/or WRAT) in analogous Bayesian regressions. If the winning model included a main effect of group, the reported 
Bayes factor is relative to an intercept-only model, alongside the analogous Bayes factor of a model (M2) without the main effect of group (i.e., 
indicating the relative contribution of group effects in the model). If the winning model did not include group, this winning model and its Bayes 
factor are reported (relative to an intercept-only model), along with the Bayes factor for a model (M2) that added an effect of group. Bolded BF 
values indicate that the winning model included group as a main effect.
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 November 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Taylor et al. Page 28
Table 5:
Descriptive behavioral measures and group comparison
Measure HCs SUDs Coefficients & t-values p-
value
Partial
η2 BF*
N = 99 168
Wins 183.25 
(13.19)
180.44 
(10.65)
b = −2.96; t(263) = −2.00 0.047 0.01 Best Model (M1): Group (BF = 0.77)
Mean RT 0.56 (0.2) 0.53 (0.25) b = −0.03; t(263) = −1.13 0.26 0.00 Best Model (M1): Sex (BF = 0.39)
M2: Sex + Group (BF = 0.02)
Win/Stay 140.65 
(35.12)
133.51 
(33.08)
b = −8.99; t(263) = −2.21 0.03 0.02 Best Model (M1): Age + Group + Sex (BF > 
1000)
M2: Age + Sex (BF > 1000)
M1/M2: BF= 1.31
Win/Shift 30.97 
(30.88)
34.79 (28.6) b = 5.57; t(263) = 1.58 0.11 0.01 Best Model (M1): Age + Sex (BF > 1000)
M2: Age + Sex + Group (BF > 1000)
M1/M2: BF = 2.28
Lose/Stay 47.27 
(27.07)
50.48 
(29.67)
b = 2.04; t(263) = 0.58 0.57 0.00 Best Model (M1): Age (BF = 565.78)
M2: Age + Group (BF = 14.67)
Lose/Shift 81.11 
(28.11)
81.21 
(31.75)
b = 1.38; t(263) = 0.37 0.71 0.00 Best Model (M1): Age (BF = 478.04)
M2: Age + Group (BF = 13.73)
Note: Inferential statistics reported here are based on linear models including age and sex as covariates. For analogous results in the subsample with 
available WRAT scores (including WRAT as an additional covariate), see Table S1.5. For results dividing choices into early and late choices per 
block, see Table S1.6.
*See note below Table 6 for interpretation of these Bayes factor analyses. For results in which BFs for both M1 and M2 are >1000 relative to an 
intercept-only model, we also report the BF for M1 relative to M2 for comparative interpretability.
Drug Alcohol Depend. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 November 01.