TYPE Review
PUBLISHED /one.tnum/four.tnum December /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum
DOI /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/five.tnum/six.tnum/eight.tnum/three.tnum/one.tnum
OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY
Filippo Cieri,
Cleveland Clinic, United States
REVIEWED BY
Yorgos Dimitriadis,
Université de Paris, France
Maria Cristina Patru,
International Mental Mental Health
SA, Switzerland
*CORRESPONDENCE
Jessica Tran The
jessica.tran-the@unicaen.fr
SPECIALTY SECTION
This article was submitted to
Cognitive Neuroscience,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience
RECEIVED /three.tnum/zero.tnum May /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum
ACCEPTED /two.tnum/one.tnum November /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum
PUBLISHED /one.tnum/four.tnum December /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum
CITATION
Tran The J, Ansermet J-P,
Magistretti PJ and Ansermet F (/two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum)
Hyperactivity of the default mode
network in schizophrenia and free
energy: A dialogue between Freudian
theory of psychosis and neuroscience.
Front. Hum. Neurosci./one.tnum/six.tnum:/nine.tnum/five.tnum/six.tnum/eight.tnum/three.tnum/one.tnum.
doi: /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/five.tnum/six.tnum/eight.tnum/three.tnum/one.tnum
COPYRIGHT
© /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum Tran The, Ansermet,
Magistretti and Ansermet. This is an
open-access article distributed under
the terms of the
Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY) . The use,
distribution or reproduction in other
forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright
owner(s) are credited and that the
original publication in this journal is
cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use, distribution
or reproduction is permitted which
does not comply with these terms.
Hyperactivity of the default
mode network in schizophrenia
and free energy: A dialogue
between Freudian theory of
psychosis and neuroscience
Jessica Tran The /one.tnum,/two.tnum,/three.tnum,/four.tnum,/five.tnum,/six.tnum*, Jean-Philippe Ansermet /seven.tnum,
Pierre J. Magistretti /five.tnum,/eight.tnum,/nine.tnumand Francois Ansermet /five.tnum,/one.tnum/zero.tnum
/one.tnumINSERM U/one.tnum/zero.tnum/seven.tnum/seven.tnum Neuropsychologie et Imagerie de la Mémoire Humaine, Caen, France, /two.tnumCentre
Hospitalier Universitaire de Caen, Caen, France, /three.tnumUniversité de Caen Normandie, Caen, France,
/four.tnumEcole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, Université Paris Sciences e t Lettres, Paris, France, /five.tnumAgalma
Foundation Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, /six.tnumCyceron, Caen, France, /seven.tnumÉcole Polytechnique Fédérale
de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, /eight.tnumDivision of Biological and Environmental Sciences and
Engineering (BESE), King Abdullah University of Science and T echnology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia,
/nine.tnumBrain Mind Institute, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology La usanne, Lausanne, Switzerland,
/one.tnum/zero.tnumDépartement de Psychiatrie, Faculté de Médecine, Universit é de Genève, Geneva, Switzerland
The economic conceptualization of Freudian metapsychology, base d on an
energetics model of the psyche’s workings, oﬀers remarkable commo nalities
with some recent discoveries in neuroscience, notably in the ﬁeld o f
neuroenergetics. The pattern of cerebral activity at resting s tate and the
identiﬁcation of a default mode network (DMN), a network of areas whose
activity is detectable at baseline conditions by neuroimaging t echniques,
oﬀers a promising ﬁeld of research in the dialogue between psycho analysis
and neuroscience. In this article we study one signiﬁcant clinical app lication
of this interdisciplinary dialogue by looking at the role of t he DMN in
the psychopathology of schizophrenia. Anomalies in the functio ning of the
DMN have been observed in schizophrenia. Studies have eviden ced the
existence of hyperactivity in this network in schizophrenia pat ients, particularly
among those for whom a positive symptomatology is dominant. Th ese data
are particularly interesting when considered from the perspect ive of the
psychoanalytic understanding of the positive symptoms of ps ychosis, most
notably the Freudian hypothesis of delusions as an “attempt at recovery.”
Combining the data from research in neuroimaging of schizophre nia patients
with the Freudian hypothesis, we propose considering the hyper activity of
the DMN as a consequence of a process of massive reassociation of trace s
occurring in schizophrenia. This is a process that may constitute an attempt
at minimizing the excess of free energy present in psychosis. M odern models
of active inference and the free energy principle (FEP) may shed s ome light on
these processes.
KEYWORDS
default network, schizophrenia, trace reassociation, psychoanalysis, free energy
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience /zero.tnum/one.tnum frontiersin.org
Tran The et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/five.tnum/six.tnum/eight.tnum/three.tnum/one.tnum
Introduction
The economic conceptualization of Freudian
metapsychology, which is based on an energetics model of
the psyche’s workings, oﬀers remarkable commonalities with
some recent advances in neuroscience, notably discoveries
in the ﬁeld of neuroenergetics (
Friston et al., 2006 ; Tran The
et al., 2018 ; Cieri and Esposito, 2019 ). As early as 1895, in his
Project for a Scientiﬁc Psychology (1895a), Freud’s intention had
been to base his understanding of normal and pathological
psychic processes on a description of brain function. At
that time, he had postulated the existence of a fundamental
tendency of the nervous system to reduce all quantities of
neuronal excitation: “the principle of neuronal inertia.” This
speculative proposal on brain function rested on a concept
of “quantity” of neuronal energy or intracerebral excitation a
theory inﬂuenced both by the physicalism of the Helmholtz
school (
Helmholtz, 1882 ), and by Oswald’s energetics model.
Oswald stated that: “. . . psychological phenomena can be
construed as energetic phenomena, and interpreted as such
just as well as any other phenomena” (
Oswald, 1891 ). This
desire to apply the overarching principles of thermodynamic
physics to living organisms, and more speciﬁcally to the nervous
system, supports the view that the father of psychoanalysis
was following in the tradition of the Helmholtz School and its
director, Brücke.
Yet, Freud will distance himself from this ambition
to explain the psychological processes by reference to the
physiology of the nervous system. He did not proceed with
the publication of the Project manuscript, which remained
unﬁnished, because of the limitations of biological knowledge
at that time:
“[I am] not at all inclined to leave the psychology
hanging in the air without an organic basis. But apart
from this conviction I do not know how to go on, neither
theoretically nor therapeutically, and therefore must behave
as if only the psychological were under consideration.”
(
Freud, 1898, p. 326)
Thus, from 1897, with The Interpretation of Dreams (Freud,
1900), Freud abandoned his references to anatomy and adopted
an exclusively psychological vocabulary. It is at that point that
he introduced the fundamental concepts of his metapsychology
or theory of the unconscious psychic processes. He did this,
however, without completely forgoing his energetics concept
of the psychic processes, since the quantity of psychic energy
becomes the concept of libido.
“I refer to the concept that in mental functions
something is to be distinguished – a quota of eﬀect or
sum of excitation – which possesses all the characteristics
of a quantity (though we have no means of measuring it),
which is capable of increase, diminution, displacement and
discharge, and which is spread over the memory-traces of
ideas somewhat as an electric charge is spread over the
surface of a body.” (
Freud, 1894, p. 60)
Although Freud had renounced his hope of being able to
measure that quantity of energy and link it to processes in
the brain (
Rapaport, 1958 ), the psychoanalytic concept of the
psychic processes in terms of energy shows some surprising
commonalities with the ﬁeld of neuroenergetics. This new ﬁeld
of research has been opened up by the technical advances
made in neuroscience, notably in the area of neuroimaging.
In 1920, Freud himself had imagined the feasibility of such an
interdisciplinary dialogue:
“Biology is truly a land of unlimited possibilities. We
may expect it to give us the most surprising information and
we cannot guess what answers it will return in a few dozen
years to the questions we have put to it.” (
Freud, 1920, p. 60)
If psychoanalysis and neuroscience remain two ﬁelds with
their own epistemological foundations, today these two ﬁelds
do seem to have found some common ground in an energetics
concept of the living organism (
Ansermet and Magistretti, 2010 ).
From a strictly biological perspective energetics has become one
of the leading ideas. Recent neuroscientiﬁc research has brought
to light important data relating to what could be qualiﬁed as
an intrinsic activity belonging to living organisms. In particular,
the developments of recent techniques in neuroimaging such
as positive emission tomography (PET) or functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI), has oﬀered scientists the possibility
to observe regions of the brain activated during the performing
of speciﬁc tasks–be they motor, sensorial or cognitive tasks.
Since the 2000’s, some scientists have started to take an
interest in the background brain activity. This is activity that
takes place during states of rest when no task or speciﬁc
behavior is taking place. In particular, Marcus Raichle has
demonstrated that, at rest (i.e., not performing any particular
activity), some areas of the brain are more active than during the
performing of a speciﬁc task (
Raichle and Gusnard, 2002 ). There
exists therefore an activity intrinsic to the brain, a background
activity, one that is particularly costly in energy. This cerebral
network, active during resting state and called default mode
network (DMN), presents a promising ﬁeld of research for
the dialogue between psychoanalysis and neuroscience around
a concept of the living organism centered on energetics.
And we can try to throw light on the Freudian energetics
approach to psychopathological processes with these recent
neuroscientiﬁc data.
In the Project (1895a), Freud’s energetics concept was
initially principally motivated by his clinical observations of
neurotic patients. He stated that his concept of quantity “is
derived directly from pathological clinical observation” and
that in patients with neuroses “the quantitative characteristic
emerges more plainly than in the normal.” (
Freud, 1895, p. 295).
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience /zero.tnum/two.tnum frontiersin.org
Tran The et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/five.tnum/six.tnum/eight.tnum/three.tnum/one.tnum
In his Studies on Hysteria (1895d), Freud put forward
a theory of the psychopathology of hysteria as being a
consequence of the increase in the quantity of energy (psychic
excitation or quantum of aﬀect ). This quantity of excitation
was then discharged by somatic means, through the expression
of symptoms of conversion (
Freud and Breuer, 1895 ). In a
more general way, as his texts on the neuro-psychoses of
defense demonstrate (
Freud, 1894 ), right from the start Freud
understood the diﬀerent psychic pathologies as being linked to
pathological alterations in quantities of psychic energy (later
termed libido). These alterations could be linked to acquired
factors (for example subsequent to trauma) (
Freud and Breuer,
1895), as well as hereditary factors, insofar as in certain
subjects heredity “Facilitates and increases the pathological
aﬀect” (
Freud, 1896b, p. 162) in the same way as “. . . a multiplier
in an electric circuit, which exaggerates the visible deviation of
the needle, ” (
Freud, 1896a, p. 147).
Subsequently, during his study of the Schreber case, Freud
extended this hypothesis for a libidinal etiology of psychic
pathologies to the treatment of psychosis. At that moment
he proposed an innovative theory of this illness, based on a
diachronic perspective, by arguing that psychosis stemmed from
a libidinal process in two phases. The initial process of psychosis
consisted in massive withdrawal of the libido (or quantity of
psychic energy) into the ego and the body itself (
Freud, 1914 ).
This was the ﬁrst phase of the psychotic process, dominated
by signiﬁcant alteration in the perception of the body. The
positive symptoms, and importantly the patients’ delusional
constructions, belong to the second phase of psychosis, and
came as an attempt to reinvest the quantity of energy externally,
on objects and delusional representations. Delusion was thus, in
Freud’s view, an “attempt at recovery” (
Freud, 1911).
This Freudian perspective of a libidinal etiology for
psychosis, which ﬁts into the framework of a concept of
pathologies of the psyche based on energetics (and the
“economics” view of the metapsychology), can be integrated
into neuroscientiﬁc discoveries about DMN, and into recent
integrated models of brain function. In the Project, Freud
introduced energy quantities based on language of Helmoltzian
thermodynamics (
Tran The et al., 2018 ). Nowadays, a new
conceptual framework has emerged from Bayesian statistics
and information theory (
Parr et al., 2022 ). Thus, Friston
and coworkers proposed a dialog between cognitive science,
neuroscience and psychoanalysis, based on the notion of Active
Inference which is rendered quantitative thanks to the principle
of minimization of a free energy (
Carhart-Harris and Friston,
2019).
Karl Friston and others have proposed introducing a
new model for a dialogue between psychoanalysis and
neuroenergetics based on the FEP. The FEP proposes that living
organisms, as organized systems in a state of equilibrium with
their environment, need to minimize their free energy, which
is to say they need to resist the natural tendency to disorder
(
Friston, 2009; Ramstead et al., 2018 ). As has been suggested by
Mark Solms, this minimizing of the free energy is similar to a
homeostatic understanding of the regulation of the physiological
states, which would be one of the most basic functions of
consciousness-based somatic and aﬀective states (
Solms, 2013 ;
Solms and Friston, 2018 ). In Solms’ words, “. . . the long-sought
mechanism of consciousness is to be found in an extended
form of homeostasis” (
Solms, 2019 ). By integrating the idea of
free energy into a Bayesian approach to cognition, where the
brain is understood as a machine for inference (
Helmholtz,
1866; Gregory, 1968 ; Dayan et al., 1995 ), this model proposes
that the brain uses internal hierarchical models to predict
sensorial inputs. The hypothesis is that neuronal activity and
synaptic connections try to minimize the ensuing prediction-
error resulting from the inference processes (or try to minimize
the free energy) (
Carhart-Harris and Friston, 2010 ; Parr et al.,
2022). But the FEP does not only constitute an epistemological
focus in the interdisciplinary dialogue. It also opens onto
important clinical applications in the ﬁeld of psychopathology
(
Rabeyron, 2022).
From this standpoint, we will try to open a dialogue between
Freud’s view of delusion as an “attempt at recovery” and recent
data and models coming from the neurosciences, which have
been obtained through to the techniques of neuroimaging.
The data attest to the existence, in some psychiatric illnesses,
of anomalies in the neuroenergetic activity of the brain. In
this present article, we focus particularly on the literature
that evidences the existence of hyperactivity of the DMN in
schizophrenia, that is to say: an abnormally increased activity
in energetic terms observed in the cerebral activity at rest, in
patients with schizophrenia. In this article we propose using
an interdisciplinary approach to shed light on these data,
through the prism of a dialogue between psychoanalysis and
neuroscience. To do this we will make reference to the Freudian
hypothesis of delusion as an “attempt at recovery, ” and integrate
these elements to the FEP model.
To this end, we will ﬁrst give an overview of the discovery
of the DMN and the hypotheses relative to the DMN’s
possible functions. We will identify some common ground
between the DMN and the binding function of the ego
in Freudian theory, into the framework of the FEP. Then
we will review the anomalies in this network observed in
schizophrenia. Next, having reviewed the Freudian concept of
the positive symptoms of psychosis–notably his hypothesis of
delusion as an attempt at recovery– we will bring together
the data on the hyperactivity of the DMN in patients with
schizophrenia and these Freudian hypotheses. Through this
reﬂection, we propose interpreting the hyperactivity in the
DMN as consequent to a massive process of reassociation of
traces occurring in schizophrenia. The FEP perspective might
be invoked to clarify the dynamics of this particular process. In
this light, delusion could constitute an attempt at binding the
free energy through the reassociation of traces, so as to minimize
entropy and try to re-establish an allostatic equilibrium within
the psyche.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience /zero.tnum/three.tnum frontiersin.org
Tran The et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/five.tnum/six.tnum/eight.tnum/three.tnum/one.tnum
The discovery of cerebral activity
during resting state and the default
mode network
Initial research in neuroenergetics, undertaken by Louis
Sokoloﬀ and Seymour Kety in the 1950’s, already revealed that
the cost of internal functional activity represented a signiﬁcant
part of the total energy expenditure of cerebral activity (
Sokoloﬀ
et al., 1955 ). While the average adult brain represents ∼2% of the
total body weight, it nevertheless uses 20–25 % of the organism’s
total energy consumption–and that, even during resting state
(
Sokoloﬀ et al., 1955 ). The performing of tasks therefore, has
only a minimal incidence on the massive energy consumption
of the brain, producing only a rise of barely 5–10 % of the total
consumption (
Fox and Raichle, 2007 ). Marcus Raichle, in the
1990’s, began to envisage this baseline activity as a promising
ﬁeld for research (
Raichle, 2006 ), and a source of new data for
the understanding of certain psychopathological processes ( Fox
and Raichle, 2007 ).
The development of diﬀerent imaging techniques, such as
PET and fMRI made it possible to identify a network of active
areas when cognitive tasks were not being performed: the medial
prefrontal cortex, posterior cingulate cortex, the inferior parietal
lobules and the hippocampal regions (
Raichle et al., 2001 ;
Andrews-Hanna et al., 2014 ). The work done by Raichle, on
the basis of the data furnished by the study of neuroimaging,
led to the description and theorisation of the DMN. A default
mode that attests to the existence of neural and metabolic activity
that is intrinsic to the brain, and which is not linked either to a
particular environmental stimulus, nor to the performing of a
speciﬁc motor or cognitive task (
Buckner et al., 2008 ).
In the state of consciousness termed random episodic
silent thinking (REST)–during which the individual processes
corporeal information (somatosensory and vegetative), and
during which the individual also free associates ideas, emotions,
and mental images connected to the past or to future planning–
the attentional system is not solicited, and it is the DMN that
is active. This is the spontaneous brain activity generated in the
absence of any cognitive task (
Raichle, 2001; Buckner et al., 2008 ;
Cieri and Esposito, 2018 , 2019).
Raichle proposed deﬁning this default mode, or baseline
state, as the brain activity that goes with a subjective state
of rest, when the subject presents a behavior characterized by
calmness, eyes closed (or open but with no speciﬁc focus),
in a state of consciousness ﬁlled with thoughts that are
independent of external stimuli, a state that might be described
as “daydreaming” (
Raichle, 2010 ). Based on the data from
functional imaging, the brain is in fact never really at rest,
insofar as the consumption of energy linked to its intrinsic
activity, independent of any action or perception of external
stimuli, is extremely high. This baseline activity can be observed
even under general anesthesia, or in the ﬁrst stages of sleep.
Furthermore, one of the major discoveries made by Raichle and
his team was to bring to light a diminution of the default mode
activity during the performing of tasks that require directed
attention. That is to say that, certain brain regions active at rest
deactivate during the performing of a conscious goal-directed
task (
Shulman et al., 1997 ; Raichle, 2010; Passow et al., 2015 ).
This reciprocal deactivating of the DMN and the networks
linked to the attention system, such as the dorsal attention
network (DAN), which appears to be anticorrelated (
Fransson,
2005), involves an opposition between an event-related brain
activity and spontaneous brain activity (evoked/spontaneous).
The latching mechanism between the two networks may
demonstrate a change in attention that switches from an internal
self-referential state to an outwardly focused state (
Raichle,
2001), with a shift of attention between the internal and
the external. The attention system, converse to the DMN, is
activated when cognition is directed outwards and the opposite
is true for the DMN (
Buckner et al., 2008 ). However, recent
research indicates that the attention system is not a uniﬁed one.
Besides the DAN, the salience network is also active during the
performing of goal-directed tasks (
Corbetta and Shulman, 2002 ;
Fox et al., 2006 ; Carhart-Harris and Friston, 2010 ; Esposito et al.,
2018).
The mechanisms that contribute to the deactivation of
the DMN during the execution of a task that is demanding
at a cognitive level, and involves focused attention on the
environment, are still poorly understood. There are however
some studies that have brought to light a signiﬁcant co-
activation of a third network during the “switch” between the
activity of the DMN and that of the attention system (
Sridharan
et al., 2008 ). The salience network (a network comprising
the right insular cortex and the anterior cingulate cortex) is
responsible for switching between the default mode network and
the central executive network (
Goulden et al., 2014 ). Scientists
have therefore concluded that the insular cortex plays a key
role in this switch over between the internal cerebral activity
and activity that is directed toward the environment; and is
probably linked to the importance of the insula in distinguishing
between endogenous processes and exteroceptive perceptions
(
Craig, 2002; Tran The et al., 2020 ).
Hypotheses relating to the functions
of the default mode
To better understand the mechanisms of the DMN, Raichle
initially based his thinking on what was already known regarding
the behavioral and cognitive functions associated with the
main anatomical subdivisions of the baseline state network,
that is: the ventromedial prefrontal cortex, the dorsomedial
prefrontal cortex, and the posterior cingulate cortex, the adjacent
precuneus, the lateral parietal cortex (
Raichle, 2015).
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience /zero.tnum/four.tnum frontiersin.org
Tran The et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/five.tnum/six.tnum/eight.tnum/three.tnum/one.tnum
The ventromedial prefrontal cortex in particular is involved
in the processing of sensory information from the environment,
coming from the orbitofrontal cortex, and then transmitted
to structures such as the hippocampus and the amygdala
(
Raichle, 2015 ). Data from patients having suﬀered brain
damage have highlighted the importance of this area in the
control of social behavior, mood, and motivation (
Damasio et al.,
1994). Furthermore, studies of imaging performed on healthy
individuals have shown that the emotional state (as well as the
anxiety levels) of the subject has a direct eﬀect on the levels of
activity in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex within the baseline
state’s network (
Park and Moghaddam, 2017 ). An increase in the
activity of the areas of the ventromedial prefrontal cortex can
also be observed during disturbances in the body’s homeostasis,
for example during a state of hypoglycaemia (
Teves et al., 2004 ).
It can be supposed therefore that the baseline state, in that its
network involves the activation of the ventromedial prefrontal
cortex, may be involved in the processing of emotions and
disruption to homeostasis. The dorsomedial prefrontal cortex,
although it is adjacent to the ventromedial prefrontal cortex, is
involved more speciﬁcally in the perception of the self, and in
the processing of emotions that accompany that perception of
the self (
Raichle, 2015).
The posterior cingulate cortex and the medial precuneus
make up another area, notably associated with lateral parietal
elements of the DMN, that is particularly active during the
baseline state. A study made by Vincent et al. has brought
to light that these speciﬁc areas of the parietal cortex are
involved in episodic memory. Studies of functional imaging
attest to their systematic activation when a memorizing task
has successfully been performed following learning (
Vincent
et al., 2006 ). This study has also contributed to highlighting
the existence of a neuronal network linking these parietal areas
to the hippocampus, all of these networks being activated
when the subject is at rest in the absence of a task or explicit
mnesic stimulation. This activity is particularly increased if the
resting state is consecutive to activities involving memory or
the recall of elements previously memorized (
Shannon et al.,
2013).
More generally, the study of these data on the functioning of
the diﬀerent anatomical areas belonging to the DMN indicate
that it are linked to thought processes such as daydreaming
(
Buckner et al., 2008 ), self-referential mental activity (for
example attention focused on emotional or physical states), the
processing of autobiographical memories, or thoughts about
the future (
Doucet et al., 2011 ; Dor-Ziderman et al., 2013 ),
and theory of mind ( Carhart-Harris and Friston, 2019 ). This
has led scientist to hypothesis that the DMN could be the
neurobiological seat of the ‘self’ (
Andrews-Hanna, 2012 ; Cieri
and Esposito, 2019 ).
In so far as that the activity of the default mode seems
to correlate strongly with the recollection of autobiographical
memories (
Vincent et al., 2006 ; Buckner et al., 2008 ; Doucet
et al., 2011 ), this cerebral network could constitute one of the
biological foundations of what Damasio has deﬁned as our
awareness of an autobiographical self. This autobiographical
self is underpinned by old memories, the stability of which
guarantees the grounds for our sense of identity regardless of the
continuous changes to which we are subject (
Damasio, 2000 ).
From the perspective of embodied cognition , the sense of our
autobiographical self and identity is also intimately dependent
on certain representations linked to out physical cartography,
to the mental image of our own body, within certain areas
of the brain. The neuronal mechanisms that generate this
representation can be seen as the foundation for a kind of
stability of the organism–which Damasio terms the “proto-
self”–that is at the root of our sense of self. It is on the basis of
this stable representation of the body–an anchor from the point
of view of an invariable reference through time–that the sense
of an autobiographical self will subsequently develop. This is
an autobiographical self from which stems our sense of identity
regardless of the continuous changes that shape us and that:
. . . might give the brain a natural means to generate the
singular and stable reference we call self [. . . ] biologically
speaking, grounded on a collection of nonconscious neural
patterns standing for the part of the organism we call the
body proper. (
Damasio, 2000, pp. 134-135)
Within the DMN certain areas may be involved in the
integration of external stimuli, such as interoceptive physical
sensation, as well as information coming from the environment,
for example visual and auditory perceptions (
Phan et al., 2002 ).
In particular, the interaction between the DMN and the insula
may contribute to this integration between the external and
interoceptive sensations (
Molnar-Szakacs and Uddin, 2013 ;
Cieri and Esposito, 2019 ). Research on the anterior insula
undertaken by Craig has made it possible to characterize the
neurobiological foundations of this “interoceptive” sense, which
furnishes the organism with a representation in real time of
the state of its various organs. Indeed, even in the absence of
external stimuli from the environment, the brain constantly
processes endogenous perceptions coming from the viscera, the
muscles, and the joints, as well as the diﬀerent concentrations
of hormones in the blood stream, which are constantly being
detected by the nervous system. Information coming from the
body is initially processed in the medial and posterior areas of
the insula then, in a second phase, integrated within the anterior
insula (
Craig, 2002 ). The integration between the perception of
exteroceptive experiences and the representations coming from
the interoceptive endogenous perceptions, in so far as that it is
a process staggered in time in relation to the initial experience
(and which therefore does not necessarily occur during the
initial perception of the external stimuli), could thus be part of
the cerebral activity of the brain at resting state (
Ansermet and
Magistretti, 2010).
These observations have in turn led some scientist to draw
a parallel between the function of the self, notably in its
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience /zero.tnum/five.tnum frontiersin.org
Tran The et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/five.tnum/six.tnum/eight.tnum/three.tnum/one.tnum
Freudian deﬁnition, and the DMN ( Carhart-Harris and Friston,
2010; Cieri and Esposito, 2019 ; Cieri, 2022 ). This analogy
is based on evidence that this network has been linked to
spontaneous cognition and self-referential activity that not only
involves remembrance of the past and projection into the future
but also the processing of interoceptive content. Indeed, the
psychoanalytic deﬁnition of an example of the psychic self,
involves an important physical and interoceptive dimension:
according to Freud, the primary formation of the ego, in the
phase of “primary narcissism, ” would occur with the libidinal
cathexis of the subject’s own body, when all the psychic energy
uniﬁes and organizes itself taking the ego as object (
Freud,
1914). The ego would then become the object of the drive–the
sexual drives ﬁnding their origin in excitation coming from the
bodily organs. Thus, according to Cieri, in so far as in Freudian
theory the psychoanalytic signiﬁcance of the body took on an
increasingly central position (the ego, in the second topographic
model, is understood primarily as a being a physical entity)
its psychic processes appear coherent with the neuroscientiﬁc
data on brain activity at baseline conditions (
Cieri and Esposito,
2019). Furthermore, the ego, according to Freud, is made
to contend with diﬀerent demands, stemming both from the
external reality and certain interdicts, but also with the demands
of the drives coming from the body (
Freud, 1923 ); something
that further supports the parallel with the DMN.
Carhart-Harris and Friston (2010) have proposed
integrating this parallelism between the DMN and the binding
function of the ego in Freudian theory into the framework of
the FEP. On the grounds that the DMN (like the ego according
to Freud) processes and integrates the interoceptive and
exteroceptive signals, one of the functions of the DMN could be
the processing of endogenous excitation and the minimizing of
the free energy.
It should however be underlined that drawing this parallel
between the Freudian model and contemporary neuroenergetics
poses an epistemological diﬃculty. It is true that in his
Project (1895a) Freud posited a neuronal model of the
psychic mechanism. Yet, his abandoning the publication of
that manuscript indicates a renouncing of any ambitions to
locate the psychic processes within anatomical structures. In
chapter VII of The Interpretation of Dreams (
Freud, 1900 ), he
formulates this renouncement of a model based on anatomical
location, thus,
I shall entirely disregard the fact that the mental
apparatus with which we are here concerned is also known
to us in the form of an anatomical preparation, and I
shall carefully avoid the temptation to determine psychical
locality in any anatomical fashion. (
Freud, 1900, p. 536)
The proposal to locate the Freudian mechanism of the
ego within a cerebral network is therefore to step away from
the epistemological project at the origin of psychoanalysis.
Nevertheless, beginning in the 1900’s an important new current
of research, “neuropsychoanalysis, ” proposed the creation of a
new discipline. The objective was to put in place an integrative
approach. This approach would bring together psychoanalysis
and the neurosciences within a new entity, using the methods
and the techniques introduced by neuroscientiﬁc developments,
such as the data from functional imaging. The aim of this
new discipline was to form a link between psychic processes
described by psychoanalytic theory and the neuronal structures
involved in psychopathological disorders. According to Solms
and Turnbull, this approach is the only one that gives scientiﬁc
objectivity to psychoanalysis. This is an objectivity without
which psychoanalysis consists purely in a study of subjectivity
devoid of any scientiﬁc or experimental foundations (
Turnbull
and Solms, 2007 ).
The analogy between the function of the binding of the
ego’s psychic energy described by Freudian theory and the
mechanisms of the DMN as it has been described by Friston et al.
ﬁts into this neuropsychoanalytic perspective.
In Freudian theory, the ego seeks to convert the free
energy into a state of bound energy. As early as his “Project
for a Scientiﬁc Psychology” (1895a) Freud had posited a
main function of the psychic apparatus: the tendency to
discharge quantities of excitation stemming both from within
and from without the body. The distinction between free energy
and bound energy, that Freud will again return to in The
Interpretation of Dreams (1900a), encompasses in fact both
primary and secondary processes that make up two levels of
functioning in the psychic apparatus. This division of energy
into two categories of diﬀering nature brings to mind the ﬁrst
distinction made by Helmholtz between free energy (that can
turn into diﬀerent kinds of energy), and bound energy (that is
manifest solely as caloriﬁc). However, in Freud’s writings “free”
should be understood as “free to move” ( frei beweglich) and not
as “free to transform” (
Laplanche and Pontalis, 1988 ).
The free ﬂow of the energy corresponds to the primary
mechanism of the psychic functioning that Freud had initially
called principle of neuronic inertia, in which the energy has a
tendency to be discharged in a complete and immediate manner.
The secondary process, a psychic mode of functioning that
appears in a second phase, involves a binding of the energy.
That is to say, the energy is pent-up and retained within certain
neurons or neuronal networks, where it accumulates. Dating
from 1895, it was to the ego that Freud had attributed the task
of binding the psychic energy; of maintaining it constant at a
relatively high or at the very least positive level, a level “above
zero, ” within which a constant level of cathexis is maintained.
Hence, the term Bindung (binding) indicates at that stage the
movement from a state of free energy (where it would ﬂow
through the fastest routes leading to discharge, and thus to a zero
level), to one of bound energy (that is, maintained at a low but
positive level, preventing the immediate ﬂow toward discharge).
According to the theory of neurons presented in his “Project for
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience /zero.tnum/six.tnum frontiersin.org
Tran The et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/five.tnum/six.tnum/eight.tnum/three.tnum/one.tnum
a Scientiﬁc Psychology” (1895a), the binding is made biologically
possible through the existence of an network of neurons between
which connections could be built: “Now the ego itself is a mass
like this of neurones which hold fast to their cathexis–are, that
is, in a bound state; and this, surely, can only happen as a result
of the eﬀect they have on one another” (
Freud, 1895, p. 368).
This binding function of the ego is, according to Carhart-
Harris and Friston (2010) consistent with the mechanisms of
the DMN. A number of sources argue that one of the main
functions of the DMN is the elaboration of internal mental
simulations whose purpose is adaptive (
Andrews-Hanna, 2012 ;
Buckner, 2013 ). By integrating this observation into the FEP
model, it can be deduced that the system tries to maintain
the internal equilibrium of the organism through these mental
simulations or representations aimed at adaptation (
Carhart-
Harris and Friston, 2010 ). Thus, the DMN, acting as a mediator
between the internal and external stimuli is, from the point of
view of the FEP , an essential tool for maintaining equilibrium.
The energy investment by the system in trying to maintain
the lowest levels of entropy (
Carhart-Harris, 2018 ), reduces the
risk of encountering the unexpected, and thus minimizes future
uncertainty (
Friston et al., 2012 ; Cieri and Esposito, 2019 ). In
Friston’s model of the FEP , each system tries to eliminate the
free energy of its subordinate systems, through a process of
optimisation of predictions for reducing errors. In this process
it is the DMN that is most central (
Carhart-Harris and Friston,
2010). The parallel between the Freudian ego and the DMN
seems also to be supported by studies that demonstrate that
the connectivity between the diﬀerent nodes in the DMN is
absent in newborns, and that it is built and matures during
development (
Fransson et al., 2007 ; Fair et al., 2008 ; Kelly et al.,
2009). This could correspond to the Freudian hypothesis of
an ontogenetic development of the ego during the primary
narcissism stage (
Freud, 1914 ). Furthermore, the hypothesis
according to which one of the functions of the DMN (akin to
the Freudian ego) could be the integration of interoceptive and
exteroceptive signals, can also lead to one to consider that the
processes of brain plasticity (by which experiences stemming
from our interaction with the environment are inscribed and
leave a trace in our neuronal network) contribute to the brain’s
expenditure in energy at its baseline condition. These processes
could correspond to an “oﬄine” mode of functioning of the
brain, to the extent that they involve mechanisms that, even
if they are triggered by perception, are temporally out of step
with that perception. The mechanisms of plasticity can thus be
deployed following a perception even when that perception has
ended, since the information continues to be processed by the
brain (
Ansermet and Magistretti, 2010 ).
The mechanisms of neuronal plasticity (such as long-term
potentiation and depression, or the processes of consolidation
and reconsolidation, that unfold several hours to several day
after the experience has taken place) call on a great many cellular
and molecular processes: the activity of the ionic channels,
the activation of enzymes, protein synthesis, or the regulation
of the expression of diﬀerent genes that contribute to the
structural modiﬁcation of synapses. These processes present a
energetic cost to the brain, and that even when it is performing
no speciﬁc task or activity (
Ansermet and Magistretti, 2010 ).
The processes of plasticity can therefore add to the signiﬁcant
expenditure in energy observed during the baseline state,
therefore participating in the activity of the DMN.
In this way, if the mechanisms of plasticity contribute to
the continued energy activity of the brain in resting state, this
view encourages the drawing of a parallel between the energy
consumption of the brain in default mode and the functioning
of the unconscious. Indeed, in 1925, when Freud proposed a
theory of the unconscious as a system of psychic traces stemming
from the perceptual experiences, he had speciﬁcally pointed to
the existence of such an alternating functioning of the psychic
apparatus. Periods when conscious perceptual attention was
directed on external environmental stimuli would be followed
by periods during which this exteroceptive activity would cease.
The functioning of the conscious perceptual system tasked with
receiving the stimuli coming from the environment would thus
be discontinuous, and the traces resulting from the periods
of excitation would subsequently be preserved and stored
within the unconscious. The unconscious would form, inversely
to the perceptual apparatus, a system whose functioning is
continuous, where traces would continuously be processed
and reassociated with each other following diﬀerent criteria of
association (
Freud, 1925). In that regard, the opposition between
an unconscious system that functions continuously, and a
discontinuous perceptual system focused on the environment (a
system that stops during, for instance, daydreaming or sleep),
can present a resemblance with the “two views of brain function”
developed by Raichle. This is a view that is based on data from
functional imaging, where two types of brain activity alternate:
one made up of the activation of certain areas during deliberate
conscious tasks, the other linked to the activity of the DMN
when no perceptual or deliberate activity is taking place (
Raichle,
2010).
In a more general way, it remains particularly interesting to
consider the hypothesis according to which the perception of
somatic states and the integration of interoceptive information
combined with information coming from the environment
(processed oﬄine by the mechanisms of cerebral plasticity),
could constitute one of the components of the energy
expenditure of the DMN; as well as to reﬂect on these data in
the light of FEP. This interdisciplinary perspective, aimed at
bringing together research on the DMN with concepts stemming
from psychoanalysis, shows signiﬁcant promise with regards
to its application to the understanding of certain psychiatric
pathologies. Over the past few years, the DMN has received
increasing attention and it has come to light that this network
undergoes alterations in neurodegenerative illnesses, as well
as in certain psychiatric pathologies (
Cieri et al., 2020 ). More
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience /zero.tnum/seven.tnum frontiersin.org
Tran The et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/five.tnum/six.tnum/eight.tnum/three.tnum/one.tnum
speciﬁcally, the data coming from neuroimaging attest to the
existence of a hyperactivity of the DMN in schizophrenia. These
data are particularly interesting when seen through the prism
of the energetics concept of the psychic processes developed by
Freud (notably his description of the libidinal processes at work
in psychosis), and when we consider them within the FEP.
The hyperactivity of the default
mode network in schizophrenia
Since publication in 2001 of Raichle’s ﬁrst article on the
baseline state A Default Mode of Brain Function (Raichle et al.,
2001), close on 3,000 studies have been done on this subject
in laboratories around the world. Among these studies, work
focusing on the relationship between the functioning of the
baseline state and psychiatric or neurological illnesses represent
by far the largest proportion (
Raichle, 2015 ). There exists an
anomalous functional connectivity of these networks in several
mental disorders, such as anxiety, depression, bipolar disorder,
OCD, autism, and Alzheimer’s disease (
Andrews-Hanna et al.,
2014). Buckner (2013) has underlined the importance of
studying the DMN for psychosis, stating that “Psychosis may
be a network disturbance that manifests as disordered thought,
partly because it disrupts the fragile balance between the default
network and competing brain systems.” As regards the study
of alterations of the baseline network state in schizophrenia,
many studies have highlighted the existence of a hyperactivity
of the DMN in patients with schizophrenia when compared
with healthy control groups. There are, however, studies in the
literature that reach the opposite conclusion (
Zhao et al., 2018 ;
Lee et al., 2019 ). An absence of concurrence comes out of these
studies. The results remain diﬃcult to interpret, notably because
of a signiﬁcant variability in symptoms between individual
(
Lafargue, 2010).
Based on a study of MRIs focused on the baseline state in
schizophrenia patients suﬀering from auditive hallucinations,
Mallikarjun and his team have suggested that these divergences
in results could be explained by diﬀerences observed between
patients who have recently had their ﬁrst psychotic episode and
chronic patients who have been treated with neuroleptics for a
number of years. In order to reduce these biases, recent studies
have sought to distinguish between cohorts of patients who
have recently decompensated and have thus not beneﬁted from
treatment and chronic patients who have received treatment
for many years. Proposals have also been made to diﬀerentiate
patients according to the nature of their symptoms. Some
studies have also included, in addition to patient groups and
control groups, groups of ﬁrst-degree relatives of schizophrenia
patients, or subjects who present an increased risk factor for
schizophrenia but who have no apparent symptoms. A review
of the data furnished by MRI studies of the DMN in patients
with schizophrenia has highlighted that the majority of studies
observe an increased functional connectivity in the brain activity
in these patients–including in chronic patients and patients
receiving treatment (
Hu et al., 2017 ). However, three studies
found opposite results, observing a reduction in functional
connectivity in resting state (
Bluhm et al., 2007 ; Zhao et al.,
2018; Lee et al., 2019 ). All other studies mentioned by the review
evidenced the existence of a signiﬁcant hyperactivity of the DMN
in schizophrenia patients (
Liu et al., 2012 ), be it at the onset of
illness or in chronic cases ( Zhou et al., 2007 ). This hyperactivity
has also been observed in individuals who present high risk
factors for psychosis, as well as in the siblings of schizophrenia
patients who do not themselves present signs of psychosis (
Shim
et al., 2010 ). The schizophrenia patients present an increased
brain activity and an increased connectivity at resting state
within the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (
Guo et al., 2017 ), the
frontal gyrus, the insular cortex and the dorsolateral cortex, the
medial and superior temporal gyrus, and the posterior cingulate
cortex (
Galindo et al., 2018 ). Their healthy siblings or close
relatives present increased activity within the cingulate cortex
and the anterior prefrontal cortex (
Guo et al., 2017 ; Galindo
et al., 2018 ).
Additionally, the schizophrenia patients also present
anomalies in the usual deactivation of the DMN during the
performance of tasks focused on the environment or requiring
high levels of attention, when compared with the control
groups (
Hu et al., 2017 ). The activation of the attention system
networks when a task where attention is focused on external
stimuli is performed, usually involves a deactivation of the DMN
(these two networks are termed negatively correlated). This
negative correlation can be explained by a competition between
the attention resources that are either focused on the exterior
or the interior, depending on the need for responses to stimuli
coming from the environment (
Fransson, 2005). These data can,
as we have seen, present some similarities with the Freudian
description of the conscious perceptual system’s discontinuous
mode of functioning; attention being, according to Freud,
only punctually outwardly focused, as though consciousness
“stretches out feelers, through the medium of the system
Pcpt.-Cs., toward the external world and hastily withdraws them
as soon as they have sampled the excitations” (
Freud, 1925 , p.
231). While the rest of the time, psychic activity is dominated by
internal activity during which representations stemming from
mnesic traces left by the external excitations can be reassociated
with each other.
The model of negative correlation between the DMN
and the Task Positive Network (TPN) brought to light by
recent research in neuroscience appears particularly impaired in
schizophrenia patients. This is noticeable in patients suﬀering
from paranoid schizophrenia (
Zhou et al., 2007 ), and in those
with dominant positive symptoms ( Garrity et al., 2007 ), as
well as in some ﬁrst-degree relative of schizophrenia patients
(
Whitﬁeld-Gabrieli et al., 2009 ). The functional hyperactivity
of the DMN in schizophrenia patients would thus be present
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience /zero.tnum/eight.tnum frontiersin.org
Tran The et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/five.tnum/six.tnum/eight.tnum/three.tnum/one.tnum
both at resting state as well as during the performance of
tasks; and, in general, the patients whose pathological symptoms
are the most signiﬁcant are those who present the lowest
level of deactivation of this network during tasks. According
to the authors, this defect in the deactivation of the DMN
during positive tasks could explain the attention and cognitive
disorders observed in some schizophrenia patients (
Whitﬁeld-
Gabrieli et al., 2009 ). Since the DMN is usually associated with
the presence of thoughts independent of external stimuli–for
example introspection and self-referential thoughts–it seems
coherent that results, obtained during tasks that require a high
level of attention focused on the environment, should be less
good when the internal activity is high. This would be because
the high level of internal activity could contribute to deﬁciencies
in terms of vigilance and attention owing to competition with
the self-referential cognitive activity (
Whitﬁeld-Gabrieli and
Ford, 2012 ), for example when a signiﬁcant delusional activity
is present.
The signiﬁcant number of studies having observed
functional hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity within the
diﬀerent areas of the DMN (be it in resting state or during the
performance of tasks) in patients with schizophrenia, has led
Hu and Zong to state that this discovery represents some of the
most important neurobiological data to emerge from recent
research on schizophrenia:
On the basis of recent evidence, functional
hyperconnectivity within the DMN is perhaps the most
common ﬁnding in comparisons of schizophrenia patients
with healthy controls. It has been extensively found in
diﬀerent schizophrenia populations, including chronic
paranoid schizophrenia, ﬁrst episode schizophrenia,
individuals at ultra-high risk for psychosis, and the ﬁrst-
degree relatives of patients with schizophrenia.
(Hu et al.,
2017)
According to Liu and his team, the hyperactivity of the
DMN may more speciﬁcally constitute an endophenotype of
schizophrenia, but other members of the population could
present with a hyperactivity of the DMN without presenting
psychotic symptoms (
Liu et al., 2012 ).
Furthermore, if in the majority of studies this hyperactivity
is observed, these conclusions should be put into perspective by
the extremely variable nature of the results. To explain these
diﬀerences, some scientists have tried to establish a correlation
between the nature of the symptomatology the schizophrenia
patient presents with and the anomalies of activity of the
DMN. The presence of auditory hallucinations (already linked
to activity of the areas involved in auditory processing, language
and memory, as well as the salience network) has been linked
to hyperactivity of several areas of the DMN. A study by
Mallikarjun has shown that the superior temporal cortex, the
insula, the precuneus, the posterior cingulate cortex, and the
parahippocampal region, are particularly active areas in subjects
who have presented auditory hallucinations during the fMRI
sequence (
Mallikarjun et al., 2018 ). The patients who hallucinate
show an increased functional connectivity at rest between parts
of the salient network and the DMN, but a reduced functional
connectivity between the claustrum and the insula, compared to
the healthy cohort. Scientist have expressed the hypothesis that
the hyperactivity observed within the DMN, and the salience
network, could be linked to an alteration in the evaluation of
the salience of the internal activity, an alteration that would then
contribute to the origin of the hallucination.
Although the function of the claustrum remains poorly
understood, some studies have brought to light that this
structure may be involved in consciousness of perceptual
experiences. Anomalies of the claustrum could compromise the
synchronization between the associative cortex of the prefrontal
lobe and the parietal lobe (
Koubeissi et al., 2014 ; Yin et al., 2016 ;
Fodoulian et al., 2020 ).
Another similar theory of the function of the claustrum
posits that this brain region is involved in the timing
and coordination of the cortical activity that results
ultimately in perceptual experience. Disruption of the
binding or synchronization of sensory, cognitive, and motor
information could contribute to delusions and hallucinations
in schizophrenia patients. There is a possible further link
between the severity of delusions in the disease and structural
abnormalities in the claustrum (
Cascella and Sawa, 2014 ).
It has also been proposed that the diminution in functional
connectivity observed between the claustrum and the insula
could lead to a compensatory overactivation within some areas
of the auditory network, including in some areas of the DMN
and areas associated with the processing of language and
memory (
Mallikarjun et al., 2018 ).
These data regarding an increased activity of the DMN
in patients who present with auditory hallucinations support
the results from studies that have demonstrated that the
hyperactivity in the DMN could be attributable to what is termed
the “positive” symptomatology of schizophrenia (
Garrity et al.,
2007). It has also been demonstrated that, inversely, a correlation
exists between negative symptoms and the activity of the right
anterior prefrontal cortex at resting state (
Reichenbach et al.,
2012). The increased hyperactivity is particularly important in
schizophrenia patients who present with delusional ideas with a
paranoid thematic, when compared with other patients (
Zhou
et al., 2007 ) and, as we have seen, in patients suﬀering from
auditory hallucinations ( Garrity et al., 2007 ).
The positive symptoms of
schizophrenia according to the
Freudian perspective
Within the scope of a dialogue between psychoanalysis
and neuroscience centered on an energetics concept of mental
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience /zero.tnum/nine.tnum frontiersin.org
Tran The et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/five.tnum/six.tnum/eight.tnum/three.tnum/one.tnum
activity, and in the light of a psychoanalytic understanding of
psychosis, it is particularly interesting to deliberate the data
coming from neuroimaging, in particular data that bring to
light the existence of an increased hyperactivity of the DMN
in patients with schizophrenia who present positive symptoms
(characterized by delusional ideas and auditory hallucinations).
To do this, we are ﬁst going to evoke the Freudian hypotheses
regarding the positive symptoms of schizophrenia, particularly
from the perspective of delusions in psychosis understood as an
“attempt at recovery.”
Freud, as we have seen, had proposed early on in his work
a concept of mental disorders based on energetics. Once he
had abandoned references to physiology and the anatomy of
the nervous system, it is the concept of libido that becomes
the focal point of the economics of his metapsychology.
Starting with his study of the Schreber case, Freud narrowed
down his understanding of the libidinal processes at work
in psychosis. In the context of his disagreement with Jung,
he remodeled his deﬁnition of libido. Freud’s research led,
in On Narcissism: An introduction (1914c), to the distinction
between narcissistic libido which cathects the ego and an object
libido turned toward the outer world. The introduction of
narcissism would then enable Freud to disentangle the two
phases of the psychotic process that consisted in a twofold
libidinal movement. The ﬁrst phase of psychosis consisted
in a massive withdrawal of libidinal cathexis, of all the
psychic energy, from external objects; the libido ﬂowing back,
exclusively on the ego and the subject’s own body. This ﬁrst
phase was characterized by the fact that the patient (notably
in those with schizophrenia) “. . . withdraws his interest from
the external world completely. . . ” (
Freud, 1911 , p. 75). The
negative symptomatology of schizophrenia, such as being
withdrawn, blunted aﬀect, apragmatism, and also deteriorations
in representations of the body (cenesthetic hallucinations,
hypochondria, dysmorphophobia) are characteristic of this
initial phase.
With Schreber this initial libidinal phase was expressed
notably by a world’s end fantasy, in which the universe
is perceived by the subject to be totally devastated and
depopulated, with men reduced to being only botched shadows:
The patient has withdrawn from the people in his
environment and from the external world generally the
libidinal cathexis which he has hitherto directed on to them.
Thus everything has become indiﬀerent and irrelevant to
him. . . The end of the world is the projection of his internal
catastrophe; his subjective world has come to an end since
his withdrawal of his love from it. (
Freud, 1911, p.70)
Freud postulated that this ﬁrst phase is common to all forms
of psychosis. However, in order to ﬁght against this movement
of libidinal withdrawal, some patients put in place a second
process that would consist in an attempt to reinvest external
objects with the libido. This second phase found its expression
in productive symptomatology such as auditory hallucinations
and delusional ideas:
When he does so replace them, the process seems to be
a secondary one and to be part of an attempt at recovery,
designed to lead the libido back to objects. ( Freud, 1914 ,
p. 74)
With Schreber, the paranoid delusion thus formed an
attempt to “reconstruct” the world, for after having withdrawn
his libidinal cathexis from the external objects of the world in
the withdrawal phase, he sought to reinvest objects through
his delusion. It was in eﬀect a delusional external reality he
constructed but, from a strictly libidinal perspective, this motion
did constitute an attempt to reinvest an objective world: “We
take to be the pathological product is in reality an attempt at
recovery, a process of reconstruction.” (
Freud, 1911, p. 71).
The logic of delusion as attempt at recovery should thus
be understood primarily as relating to a libidinal and energetic
dynamic, and in the diachronic perspective of a succession of
two phases within the psychotic process. Freud’s formulation
therefore puts the emphasis on the essentially temporal character
of psychosis. The delusional construct unfolds progressively,
as Schreber’s autobiography demonstrates, and can sometimes
spread over an entire lifetime. In this, Freud is breaking with
theories that see delusion as a deﬁciency; in a gesture that is seen
as radically subversive by classical psychiatry. Thus, he proposes
assimilating the delusion production to an “autoplastic” creative
act (106), similar to an active phase involving a high cost in
energy since through this delusion process “the ego creates,
autocratically, a new external and internal world;” (
Freud, 1924a,
p. 151).
Furthermore, Freud argued that the process of delusional
reconstruction implied not only the creation of a new reality but
also required the psychotic to rebuild they memories, that is to
say “. . . the store of memories of earlier perceptions. . . ” (
Freud,
1924a, p. 150) that constituted a copy of the past world. Thus,
the reconstruction not only necessitated the generation of new
current perceptions, perceptions through which “Normally, the
external world governs the ego. . . ” (
Freud, 1924a , p. 150) but
must also, in order to be operant, modify past perception, as
though they were witnesses to a previous world, which must
be erased:
In psychosis, the transforming of reality is carried out
upon the psychical precipitates of former relations to it
– that is, upon the memory-traces, ideas and judgements
which have been previously derived from reality and by
which reality was represented in the mind. ( Freud, 1924b ,
p. 185).
The scope of the delusion reaches even into memory itself,
remodeling the mnesic traces despite them being the traces of
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience /one.tnum/zero.tnum frontiersin.org
Tran The et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/five.tnum/six.tnum/eight.tnum/three.tnum/one.tnum
past perceptions. Now, if according to Freud the memories of
these past experiences form the main basis of our relationship to
the real world, this relationship is nevertheless not closed and is
“. . . continually being enriched and altered by fresh perceptions.”
(
Freud, 1924b , p. 185). The unconscious work of this psychotic
rebuilding therefore also has as its objective, the creation of
perceptions that can correspond to a new reality, aim that
would be “. . . most radically eﬀected by means of hallucination.”
(
Freud, 1924b, p. 186).
Freud, therefore, sees auditory hallucination as being an
integral part of reconstruction of the delusional world in
a dialectic between memory and perception: if the delusion
rebuilds the past traces of the relationship to reality through
mnesic illusions of false memories, it also reconstructs the
current relationship through the creation of new perception
(
Freud, 1924b ). Auditory hallucinations should thus be
understood as mad traces (Assoun, 2005 ). Indeed, for Freud,
hallucination does not belong to a perception that is false or
without object but is to be seen more speciﬁcally as a confusion
between a memory and a current perception (
Freud, 1923 ),
where the memory ﬁnds itself invested with the strength that
usually characteristic of the cathexis of external perceptions.
The mechanism through which the delusional
reconstruction operates, from the Freudian perspective,
generally involves a repression of all the mnesic network. The
creation of a new reality does not come about ex nihilo but
happens on the basis of mnesic traces that have really been
perceived. Traces that are then reassociated and reorganized
between themselves in new ways.
Hyperactivity of the DMN in
schizophrenia and the reassociation
of traces during delusions
The Freudian psychoanalytic perspective according to which
the positive symptomatology of psychosis (delusional ideas
and auditory hallucinations) is the result of a process of trace
reassociations, is interesting to put into perspective alongside
the neuroimaging data that evidence a hyperactivity of the DMN
in schizophrenia patients, in particular those for whom positive
symptoms are predominant. Nowadays, this interaction between
reassociation of traces and DMN might be accounted for within
the framework of the free energy principle (FEP) (
Rabeyron and
Massicotte, 2020), and various forms of failure of the process of
linking, regulation and transformation of free energy within the
psychic apparatus could be considered as the origin of diﬀerent
psychopathological manifestations (
Rabeyron, 2021).
As we have seen, the activation of the DMN is generally
associated with spontaneous cognitive activity and self-
referential processes; in particular the remembrance of
autobiographical memories and projections into the future
(
Vincent et al., 2006 ; Andrews-Hanna et al., 2010 ; Doucet
et al., 2011 ). The activation of the DMN in the absence of
a task focused on the environment ( Andrews-Hanna et al.,
2010) appears to be particularly dominated by the recollection
of autobiographical memories ( Doucet et al., 2011 ). These
processes, as we have seen, involve a neuronal network that
belongs to the DMN, one that associates certain regions of
the parietal cortex and regions of the hippocampus (
Gusnard
and Raichle, 2001 ; Vincent et al., 2006 ). We have seen that
the medial parietal cortex, as well as the medial prefrontal
cortex, are themselves the seat of hyperactivity at resting state in
patients with schizophrenia. Neither do these areas deactivate,
as much as in the healthy control group, during the performance
of a speciﬁc task.
Thus, one can make the hypothesis that the hyperactivity of
the DMN in psychosis constitutes the physiological expression
of the massive reassociation of traces taking place as part of
the psychotic process. This is a process that, notably, involves
autobiographical memories. The participation of brain areas
which are part of the DMN in autobiographical memory and
in the planiﬁcation of future event, two aspects which are
essential to the generation self-representation (what Damasio
terms autobiographical self), has encouraged scientist to make
the link between changes to self-representation in schizophrenia
and the presence of an excessive cerebral activity at resting state.
As Lafargue underlines:
The function of the DMN is probably to ensure the
coherence of thoughts throughout life, be it memories
or imagining the future, by facilitating the elaboration of
mental models linked to personal events. This function of
cognitive oversight appears to be altered in schizophrenia.
Anomalies in the functioning of the DMN have been brough
to light (
Lafargue, 2010, p. 47)[our translation]
If, as we have seen, the productive symptomatology may
stem from a massive reassociation of traces, hyperactivity of the
DMN would thus appear to be the physiological outcome of
this process. The proliferation of representations at the onset
of the process of reconstruction of the world performed by
the delusions [prodrome that the alienists had described as
an “incubation period” of the delusional ideas (
Sérieux and
Capgras, 1982 )] might manifest itself through an increased
activity of the spontaneous cognitive processes involving, and
therefore an increased expenditure of energy in the areas
associated with the DMN. The hyperactivity observed in the
DMN in schizophrenia particularly aﬀects the posterior regions
(such as the posterior cingulate cortex and the inferior parietal
cortex) and the anterior regions (medial prefrontal cortex,
hippocampus and lateral temporal cortex). These are areas
that are almost identical to those activated during experiments
that require the subject to recall certain autobiographical
memories (
Svoboda et al., 2006 ), and encompass speciﬁcally
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience /one.tnum/one.tnum frontiersin.org
Tran The et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/five.tnum/six.tnum/eight.tnum/three.tnum/one.tnum
the parietal-hippocampal network that Vincent and his team
describe as particularly involved in episodic memory and
the recollection of memories. The function of the delusion
according to Freud focuses on “. . . the store of memories of
earlier perceptions. . . ” (1924b, p. 150). In order to rebuild
reality, the delusional construct must, even before creating new
perceptions, modify the reﬂection of the external world that
are our representations stemming from mnesic traces left by
past perceptions. If the remodeling of reality focuses selectively
on “. . . the memory-traces, ideas and judgements which have
been previously derived from reality” (
Freud, 1924b , p. 185),
we may conceive that, from a neurobiological perspective, this
reconstruction makes signiﬁcant demands on the regions of the
brain involved autobiographical memory.
Furthermore, the areas situated in the medial line of the
DMN are also activated when the subjects anticipate or imagine
future events (
Addis et al., 2007 ). This aspect plays a signiﬁcant
role in delusional constructs. Speciﬁcally, anticipation of events
to come appear to be one of the major components of most
delusional thematics. Delusions of persecution are characterized,
in their most severe instances, by a massive anxiety on the
subject’s part regarding their future, even going as far as believing
that an attempt on their life is imminent. With erotomania, it
is generally the prospect of marriage or of imminent reunions
with the loved one that dominate the representations linked to
the future. This is the case with the patient Freud describes in his
article The Neuro-Psychoses of Defence (1894a), who is convinced
that her beloved, who had abandoned her, will return to her at a
speciﬁc date. Similarly in the ﬁnal evolution of Judge Schreber’s
delusion, where peace seems to come from the fact that he defers
the realization of his transformation into a woman to a distant
future (
Schreber, 2000 ). Representations linked to projections
into the future are thus particularly solicited by the delusional
activity, and that even within the diﬀerent thematics of delusion.
Finally, studies on the correlation between the diﬀerent
forms of spontaneous cognition and the activation of the DMN
have brought to light that the temporoparietal junction, the
cingulate cortex and the precuneus (areas that are particularly
active at resting state in schizophrenia patients) (
Saxe and
Kanwisher, 2003 ; Spreng et al., 2009 ) intervene not only in
autobiographical memory but are also activated when the
participants try to imagine a situation through the eyes of
someone else, “putting themselves in another person’s shoes.”
What cognitive psychology terms theory of mind–that is to
say, the ability to project oneself into, and imagine what is
happening in, the mind of another person. Now this cognitive
process is particularly involved in the construction of delusional
ideas–notably in paranoid ideas, where others are imputed with
malevolent ideas.
The hypothesis of a strong involvement of spontaneous
cognition–more speciﬁcally autobiographical memory, the
representation of future events, and theory of mind–in the
activation of the DMN, brought to light by several studies
of imaging, looks to be particularly promising for explain
the existence of cerebral hyperactivity at resting state in
schizophrenia patients. As Bastin underlines:
In fact, all the tasks that activate the DMN require that
the individual project themselves into a situation other than
the reality that surrounds them. They abstract themselves
from the environment to build a mental model representing
alternative scenarios. Indeed, rather than process external
stimuli, cognition is turned on the self, generating personal
memories, imagining possible future events, and reﬂecting
on personal emotions and motivation, as well as those of
others. It is then, a question of generating mental content
oneself.
(Bastin, 2018) [our translation]
It is precisely this capacity to generate and construct new
scenarios, separate from external reality, that is signiﬁcantly
mobilized in the process of delusional reconstruction such
as Freud envisaged it in the form of the construction of
a new reality. The “autoplastic” (
Freud, 1924b ) creations of
psychosis–where the subject brings together reassociations
of traces that form a new assembly of representations,
discontinuous from the initial perceptual experiences–can thus
be characterized as belonging to that type of internal cognition
that is self-referential, focused on the self, and generating
personal memories that are modiﬁed, reassociated, then put
into perspective with representations of some future events.
The hyperactivity of certain regions of the DMN observed in
schizophrenia –particularly within the prefrontal cortex, the
precuneus and the parietal areas –, in so far as that it aﬀects
the areas involved in episodic memory, the recollection of
autobiographical memories, the representations of other people’s
somatic states, and the ability to generate mental simulations as
well as projection into the future, could therefore be correlated
with an important activity of these diﬀerent cognitive functions
during the process of constructing a new realty by way of
delusions. This hypothesis can be underpinned by the fact
that scientists have frequently noted a correlation between this
hyperactivity and the presence of a positive symptomatology in
the schizophrenia patients (
Whitﬁeld-Gabrieli et al., 2009 ).
Discussion
We will now look at integrating this position with the FEP ,
which assimilates the functioning of the brain to the stationary
state of a non-equilibrium system (
Jarzynski, 1997 ) while also
drawing on a Bayesian approach ( Cieri et al., 2021 ). According
to Friston (2009), the brain strives to minimize variations in
free energy by maximizing evidence drawn from perceptual
experiences and by reducing the element of surprise through an
active role on the outside world (
Ortega and Braun, 2010 ).
Freud speaks of an energy quantity that can be either
free or bound. This is quite distinct from the formal notion
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience /one.tnum/two.tnum frontiersin.org
Tran The et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/five.tnum/six.tnum/eight.tnum/three.tnum/one.tnum
of free energy of thermodynamics, statistical physics and
active inference (
Parr et al., 2022 ). However, we observe that
psychoanalysis and the neurosciences agree when it comes to
the observation that some representations–particularly those
stemming from our experiences with the environment, which
are stored in our autobiographical memory–can work as a
medium for the binding function. These representations take on,
in combination with traces from somatic states, a homeostatic
role in the psychic balance and are generators of a form of mental
equilibrium (
Freud, 1900; Ansermet and Magistretti, 2004 , 2010;
Tran The et al., 2021 ).
In a FEP perspective, we can assume that the brain tries
to maintain an internal equilibrium based on representations
constructed from traces that stem from our past experiences.
These traces are associated with our internal physiological
and somatic states. As Solms has suggested, this minimizing
of the free energy can be put in parallel with a homeostatic
understanding of the regulation of physiological states (
Solms,
2013, 2019; Solms and Friston, 2018 ). This is a point of view that
is also held by Damasio (2000). From this standpoint the DMN,
acting as mediator between the internal and external stimuli, is
an essential tool for the maintaining of an equilibrium aimed at
minimizing free energy (
Cieri and Esposito, 2019 ). Speciﬁcally,
the superior cortical areas try to organize the activity of the
lower levels by decreasing their free energy (
Carhart-Harris and
Friston, 2010).
The French psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan took a particular
interest in the idea that the traces that stem from the inscription
of the Oedipal experience could have similar eﬀects of balancing
the psyche (
Lacan, 1946 ). Likewise, certain traces (conscious
or not) and autobiographical memories that are essential to
the generation of what Damasio terms our consciousness of an
autobiographical self (which are at the basis of our sense of self
identity and which are stable through time), can be part of this
maintenance of equilibrium in energetic terms (
Damasio, 2000).
This energy equilibrium might be linked to Noether’s physics
theorem according to which a system that has time translation
symmetry is characterized by energy conservation.
It is probable that this process of equilibrium fails in the case
of schizophrenia. Following the hypothesis of disconnection,
this pathology is characterized by an anomalous interaction
between the specialized cerebral regions. This results in a
defective integration of the activity between the diﬀerent
networks, and thus a breakdown in cognition. With this
pathology there is also a failure in the process of inference, owing
to a defect in the modulation of somatic states (
Friston and
Frith, 1995 ; Friston et al., 2016 ). This build-up of disorder can
be associated with what Freud had characterized as the primary
phase of the psychopathological process at work in psychosis,
a process dominated clinically by disorders in perception of
the body and in interoception (
Freud, 1911 ), which constitute
the precursory stage to schizophrenia ( Freud, 1915–1916/1963 ).
This coincides with the presence in this pathology of an
increased sub-cortical hyperconnectivity that translates into a
heightened entropy within the brain as a whole (
Salman et al.,
2019). The result of psychosis would be a failure of the process
of minimization of free energy and, statistically speaking, any
exteroceptive or interoceptive sensation could then become
surprising and unpredictable. Thus, according to
Carhart-Harris
and Friston (2010), in schizophrenia the functions coming down
from the brain fail to predict errors. This then translates into
an increase of the free energy which cannot be controlled.
If we put this hypothesis alongside the role of binding free
energy usually performed by certain traces and autobiographical
representations, we can argue that this binding process appears
to be jeopardized in schizophrenia.
This hypothesis can also be put alongside the research
that has brought to light lacunae amongst the neurons
involved in long-term memory and memory consolidation, in
schizophrenia patients; in particular, lacunae within certain
populations of neurons with precocious neurogenesis that
express parvalbumin within the hippocampus (
Donato et al.,
2015; Genzel et al., 2015 ; Carvalho, 2017 ). These lacunae
could lead to a lack of consolidation and stability in some
traces and in autobiographical memories, which are essential
to the generation of what Damasio terms our awareness of
an autobiographical self that is at the root of our sense of
self identity (
Damasio, 2000 ). In the absence of stability over
time, these traces could perhaps be more subject to lability and
reassociations in psychotic patients.
Indeed, according to Bastin, the cerebral circuits of the
DMN habitually “allow individuals to experience identity and
consciousness” (
Bastin, 2018 ) [our translation]. The unstable
aspect of identity and of autobiographical consciousness of
self in psychosis (notably because of the absence of a ﬁxed
stability of the traces that are the basis of this identity) could
thus create massive functional reorganization of the DMN’s
activity. This neuroscientiﬁc hypothesis of a link between the
hyperactivity of the DMN and a massive spontaneous cognitive
activity is particularly rich in possibilities, if it is looked at
through the prism of the Freudian deﬁnition of delusion as
an attempt at recovery. Where the traces that make up our
sense of autobiographical self usually appear to be stable and
well-organized, thus guaranteeing low entropy, their lack of
consolidation in schizophrenia may have as consequence a state
of disorder, away from equilibrium (or from homeostasis) and
an increase in free energy ﬂuctuations. The disruption of these
mnesic traces or representations that are at the root of identity
and a sense of self, might then be assimilated to a dissipative
process, i.e., to an internal production of entropy (
Prigogine,
1967; Prigogine and Stengers, 1984 ). This could correspond to
the presence of a globally and locally more entropic IRMf signal
among schizophrenia patients. This increase in cerebral entropy
constitutes an example of the disorganized peak activity that
underlies schizophrenia (
Sokunbi et al., 2014 ). According to
Carhart-Harris and Friston (2010) acute psychosis corresponds
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience /one.tnum/three.tnum frontiersin.org
Tran The et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/five.tnum/six.tnum/eight.tnum/three.tnum/one.tnum
to a mode of functioning described by Freud as the primary
process, where the free energy is unbound. The DMN, which
normally functions to minimize free energy through a hierarchy
that goes from the lower to the higher levels, fails in its task.
The FEP , which understands cognition as based on Bayesian
hierarchical inferences and time evolution of the free energy near
a stationary state, requires that the superior cortical areas work
to minimize the free energy of the superior levels (
Mumford,
1992; Rao and Ballard, 1999 ; Kiebel et al., 2008 ; Friston, 2010 ).
At the onset of psychosis, the DMN appears unable to control,
in a descending manner, the excess of free energy in the lower
levels. More speciﬁcally, areas of the DMN such as the ACC are
dysfunctional in schizophrenia, and these anomalies have also
been linked to disfunctions in the anterior insula (
Carter et al.,
2001). Furthermore, the data from neurobiological literature
on anomalies of the insular cortex in schizophrenia, have
demonstrated that the disfunction of the insula can constitute
one of the underlying biological causes of the disorders in
corporal perception present in schizophrenia (
Tran The et al.,
2021).
According to the FEP , the brain uses internal hierarchical
models to predict entering sensory perceptions: the brain
constructs its own descending predictions (from cortex to
perception) on the basis of sensory samples of the world
(
Friston, 2009). A failure of the integrating function of the DMN,
between the exteroceptive and interoceptive stimuli, can create
an inability to construct adequate descending predictions. Thus,
the aim of the process is to optimize the explanation of the causes
of sensory inputs, in order to establish new predictions that
inform action and behavior (
Friston, 2003 ). In schizophrenia,
this process fails, and surprise (and thus the ﬂuctuations of the
free energy) will increase.
Following the Freudian hypothesis of delusions as attempts
at recovery, the process of systemising the delusions can
constitute an attempt by the organism to try and minimize
the free energy and the disorder present in schizophrenia.
This would be an instance of the tendency of all organized
systems, and notably living organisms, to seek to lower the
level of surprise as it interacts with its environment (
Friston
et al., 2015 ). The representations ﬁxed by the systematization
of delusions could represent an attempt to minimize the
free energy, of binding it through the consolidation of the
delusional representations in a process similar to that which
Hopkins (2016) describes. This is a process based on the
normal function of dreams, which perform a reduction of
complexity (a process of binding) through the consolidation
and reconsolidation of memory. Since these mechanism for
reducing complexity appear to play an important role in mental
disorders (
Hopkins, 2016 ), it can be assumed that delusions are
an attempt at converting free energy into bound energy through
the production and the consolidation of new mnesic traces or
representations. These traces or representations stem from the
processes of reassociation described by Freud. According to
the Bayesian approach, the systematizing of delusions generates
new predictions aimed at reducing surprise and re-establishing
a form of descending causality. This process echoes Freud’s
notions of free vs. bound energy. It is consistent also with the
notion of an allostatic equilibrium of psyche.
This bringing together of the Freudian idea of delusion as
attempt at recovery and Friston’s FEP has the advantage not to
reduce the neurobiological processes at work in psychosis to a
deﬁcit but rather as a functional reorganization. Indeed, even
studies that have brought to light the existence of some deﬁcits
in anatomical connections in regions of the cerebral cortex
among patients with schizophrenia argue that the functional
hyperconnectivity between these regions could represent a
neuronal response to that an anatomical deﬁcit (
Skudlarski
et al., 2010 ). The dialogue between Freudian theory and
neuroenergetics, therefore, reintroduces a dynamic perspective
into the neurobiological study of the physiopathology of
schizophrenia. This goes beyond an exclusively localizationist
perspective reduced to a strictly anatomical view.
To envisage that the formation of delusional traces and
representations, and the systematization of delusion, might be
attempts to restore a homeostatic equilibrium by minimizing
the free energy, opens up interesting new therapeutic horizons
for the psychotherapeutic treatment of schizophrenia. The
observation that there exists a defect in the consolidation of
long-term memory in this pathology (
Donato et al., 2015 ;
Genzel et al., 2015 ; Carvalho, 2017 ), might suggest that the
psychotherapeutic work with psychotic patients could have for
its objective an alternative process to the delusion’s function
of binding free energy. The aim would be that the psychic
treatment based on talking would enable a reinscription or a
reconsolidation of those traces. This would take place through
a process of remembering of traces linked to the patient’s
experiences and their personal history. The hope would be that
this would stabilize elements of the autobiographical memory,
which could contribute to a greater “sense of self identity, ”
as suggested by
Damasio (2000). One could imagine that
regular and repeated psychotherapy sessions could stimulate and
stabilize this sense of identity and consciousness of self. The
consolidation of autobiographical traces would operate a kind
of binding of the free energy (or minimizing of the errors in
prediction according to FEP), and a regulation of the alteration
in the perception of somatic states present in psychosis.
Conclusion
To conclude, we can say that psychoanalysis and
neuroscience can ﬁnd a point for discussion around
the inference models of mental activity expressed in terms
of a free energy principle, and that this dialogue may be
particularly fruitful when it comes to the understanding of some
psychiatric pathologies. We have observed that the Freudian
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience /one.tnum/four.tnum frontiersin.org
Tran The et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/five.tnum/six.tnum/eight.tnum/three.tnum/one.tnum
understanding of psychosis is framed by a theory of libido and,
thus, of the energetics of the psychic processes. In particular,
the hypothesis of delusion as an attempt to heal involves
understanding psychosis as a libidinal (therefore energetic)
and diachronic process in two phases. Furthermore, Freud
conceived the genesis of delusional ideas in terms of a process
of “reconstruction” of reality. This is to be understood as a
process that operates through the formation of new traces by
means of a massive reassociation of traces stemming from
past perceptual experiences. This process then introduces a
signiﬁcant discontinuity between the initial experiences and the
new traces (delusional ideas and hallucinations) produced by
the individual.
Furthermore, much of the data highlight a hyperactivity of
the DMN in schizophrenia, particularly for patients in whom
the positive symptoms dominate the clinical picture. In so
far as studies have shown that the activation of the DMN is
more speciﬁcally linked to processes of spontaneous cognition
and self-referential thoughts (such as recalling autobiographical
memories or as projections into the future) this hyperactivity of
the DMN can be put in parallel with the Freudian concept of
positive symptoms in psychosis.
In the perspective of a dialogue between psychoanalysis
and neuroscience, we have thus proposed to consider the data
showing a hyperactivity in the DMN in resting state in patients
with schizophrenia as being correlative to a massive process of
reassociation of mnesic traces. This is a process that would result
in the formation by the psychotic individual of new assemblies
of traces and representations, from which delusional ideas or
auditory hallucinations would originate. This production of
new assemblies of traces would involve those areas, termed
“spontaneous cognition, ” that are associated with the activity
of the DMN, in particular autobiographical memory but also
anticipation of future events. Indeed, the process of delusional
constructions bears on the one hand on the traces resulting from
past perceptual experiences, which it tries to remodel; on the
other hand, it results in the generation of new representations
of the individual’s future. In addition, this production of new
representations introduces a reconﬁguration not only of the
representation of the self but also representations of others and
their intentions. This also joins the imaging data relating to the
contribution of mental activity linked to theory of mind, on the
activation of the DMN.
Following the FEP model, it is possible to envisage a function
of the DMN that aims to minimize the free energy, drawing a
parallel with the binding function of the ego in Freudian theory.
The creation and consolidation of new representations during
the process of delusional systemisation could, in that case, be
thought of as an attempt at minimizing the excess of free energy
present in schizophrenia. This hypothesis is in keeping with
the Freudian concept of delusion in psychosis as an attempt
at recovery.
If an interdisciplinary dialogue has been shown to be
rich in material for better understating the symptoms and
psychopathology of certain psychiatric illnesses, the data
regarding the hyperactivity of the DMN still need to be
better understood. Indeed, the functions of the DMN are
still subject to debate in the scientiﬁc community, and
some studies done with schizophrenia patients have presented
sometimes contradictory results. Nevertheless, integrating the
ideas stemming from psychoanalysis within the neuroscience
research on schizophrenia may help understand psychosis
as a diachronic process. This, in turn, could encourage the
setting up of longitudinal studies to better understand the
outcomes and evolution of the clinical picture for long-term
patients. The Freudian understanding of psychosis in particular
emphasizes the temporal and diachronic logic of this pathology,
in the evolution of its libidinal–and thus energetic–dynamic.
Integrating this view with research in neuroscience can thus
lead to encouraging the development of longitudinal studies in
imaging, in order to bring to light the evolution of the activation
and the functional connectivity of the DMN at diﬀerent stages
of illness. If, in order to avoid biases (linked for example to
the administering neuroleptic treatments to patients over several
years), diﬀerent studies apply protocols involving cohorts of
untreated patients who have recently decompensated, it could be
still more informative to be able to repeat the study of imaging
on these patients at diﬀerent stages of their treatment. This,
in order to determine if their clinical evolution correlates with
variations in the level of activity and connectivity of the brain’s
DMN. Performing such longitudinal studies could ﬁt in with
the essentially diachronic character of the psychotic process as
evidenced by Freud in his concept of the twofold process at work
in psychosis.
In their review of the neuroscientiﬁc literature relating
to the activity of the DMN in schizophrenia, Hu and
his team speciﬁcally encouraged the development of such
longitudinal studies:
. . . because the divergence of ﬁndings among studies
could represent diﬀerences in the activity and connectivity
of the DMN that might be involved in diﬀerent stages of
this disease, it could be important to explore the DMN
throughout the course of schizophrenia. . .
(Hu et al., 2017 )
The study of the evolution in levels of baseline brain activity
in longitudinal neuroimaging protocols on psychotic patients
over several years, from the onset of psychosis up to an eventual
clinical stabilization, could represent a new research route. This
is a route that would make it possible to take into consideration
the psychotic process in its temporal and diachronic
dimension, eventually perhaps bringing to light correlations
between the levels of activity in the DMN and the patients’
clinical pictures.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience /one.tnum/five.tnum frontiersin.org
Tran The et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/five.tnum/six.tnum/eight.tnum/three.tnum/one.tnum
Author contributions
JT is the main contributor of this paper as part of her
postdoctoral work. FA and PM as supervisors, contributed to the
conception and development of the research, and they revised
critically the manuscript for intellectual content. All authors
contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.
Conﬂict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in
the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships
that could be construed as a potential conﬂict
of interest.
Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those
of the authors and do not necessarily represent those
of their aﬃliated organizations, or those of the publisher,
the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be
evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by
its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the
publisher.
References
Addis, D. R., Wong, A. T., and Schacter, D. L. (2007). Remembe ring
the past and imagining the future: common and distinct neural substrates
during event construction and elaboration. Neuropsychologia 45, 1363–1377.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2006.10.016
Andrews-Hanna, J. R. (2012). The brain’s default network and its adaptive role
in internal mentation. Neuroscientist 18, 251–270. doi: 10.1177/1073858411403316
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Reidler, J. S., Huang, C., and Buckner, R. L. (2010).
Evidence for the default network’s role in spontaneous cogniti on. J. Neurophysiol.
104, 322–335. doi: 10.1152/jn.00830.2009
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Smallwood, J., and Spreng, R. N. (2014). T he default
network and self-generated thought: component processes, dyn amic control, and
clinical relevance. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1316, 29–52. doi: 10.1111/nyas.12360
Ansermet, F., and Magistretti, P. (2004). Á chacun son cerveau: plasticité
neuronale et inconscient . Paris: Odile Jacob.
Ansermet, F., and Magistretti, P. (2010). Les Enigmes du plaisir . Paris:
Odile Jacob.
Assoun, P. L. (2005). La trace folle. Pour une métapsychologie de la trace. Che
vuoi ? 1, 83–94. doi: 10.3917/chev.023.0083
Bastin, C. (2018). Le réseau cérébral par défaut: un repos qui n’ en est pas
un. Revue de neuropsychologie neurosciences cognitives et cliniques 10, 232–238.
doi: 10.3917/rne.103.0232
Bluhm, R. L., Miller, J., Lanius, R. A., Osuch, E. A., Boksman, K. , Neufeld, R.
W., et al. (2007). Spontaneous low-frequency ﬂuctuations in the B OLD signal
in schizophrenic patients: anomalies in the default network. Schizophr. Bull. 33,
1004–1012. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbm052
Buckner, R. L. (2013). The brain’s default network: origins a nd implications
for the study of psychosis. Dialogues Clin. Neurosci. 15, 351–358.
doi: 10.31887/DCNS.2013.15.3/rbuckner
Buckner, R. L., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., and Schacter, D. L. (20 08). The brain’s
default network: anatomy, function, and relevance to disease . Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. ,
1124, 1–38. doi: 10.1196/annals.1440.011
Carhart-Harris, R. L., and Friston, K. J. (2019). REBUS and
the anarchic brain: toward a uniﬁed model of the brain action
of psychedelics. Pharmacol. Rev. 71, 316–344. doi: 10.1124/pr.118.
017160
Carhart-Harris, R. L. (2018). The entropic brain - revisited . Neuropharmacology
142, 167–178. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2018.03.010
Carhart-Harris, R. L., and Friston, K. J. (2010). The default -mode, ego-
functions and free-energy: a neurobiological account of Fre udian ideas. Brain 133,
1265–1283. doi: 10.1093/brain/awq010
Carter, C. S., MacDonald, A. W., Ross, L. L., and Stenger, V. A. (2001). Anterior
cingulate cortex activity and impaired self-monitoring of perf ormance in patients
with schizophrenia: an event-related fMRI study. Am. J. Psychiatry 158, 1423–1428.
doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.158.9.1423
Carvalho, F. (2017). Excess Dopamine D2R Activation Accounts for
PV+ Basket Cell and Learning Alteration (PhD thesis). Basel University.
Available online at:
https://edoc.unibas.ch/54785/1/Thesis_PhD_Fernando_
CarvalhoRodriguesPereira.pdf (accessed May 25, 2022).
Cascella, N. G., and Sawa, A. (2014). “The claustrum in schizophre nia, ” In:The
claustrum. Cambridge: Academic Press, 237–243.
Cieri, F. (2022). Memory for the future: psychodynamic approac h to time
and self through the default network. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 16, 885315.
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2022.885315
Cieri, F., Cera, N., Griﬀa, A., Mantini, D., and Esposito, R. (2 020). Editorial:
dynamic functioning of resting state networks in physiologic al and pathological
conditions. Front. Neurosci. 14, 624401. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2020.624401
Cieri, F., and Esposito, R. (2018). Neuroaging through the len s of the resting state
networks. Biomed Res. Int. 2018, 5080981. doi: 10.1155/2018/5080981
Cieri, F., and Esposito, R. (2019). Psychoanalysis and neuros cience: the bridge
between mind and brain. Front. Psychol. 10, 1790. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.01983
Cieri, F., Zhuang, X., Caldwell, J. Z., and Cordes, D. (2021). Br ain entropy during
aging through a free energy principle approach. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 15, 647513.
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2021.647513
Corbetta, M., and Shulman, G. L. (2002). Control of goal-direct ed and stimulus-
driven attention in the brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3, 201–215. doi: 10.1038/nrn755
Craig, A. D. (2002). How do you feel? Interoception: the sense o f
the physiological condition of the body . Nature Rev Neurosci. 3, 655–666.
doi: 10.1038/nrn894
Damasio, A. (2000). The Feeling of What Happens. Body and Emotion in the
Making of Consciousness . London: Vintage.
Damasio, H., Grabowski, T., Frank, R., Galaburda, A. M., and Da masio, A. R.
(1994). The return of phineas gage: clues about the brain from t he skull of a famous
patient. Science 264, 1102–1105. doi: 10.1126/science.8178168
Dayan, P., Hinton, G. E., Neal, R. M., and Zemel, R. S. (1995). The helmholtz
machine. Neur. Comput. 7, 889–904. Available online at: http://www.gatsby.ucl.ac.
uk/dayan/papers/hm95.pdf
Donato, F., Chowdhury, A., Lahr, M., and Caroni, P. (2015). E arly- and
late-born parvalbumin basket cell subpopulations exhibiting dist inct regulation
and roles in learning. Neuron 85, 770–786. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.
01.011
Dor-Ziderman, Y., Berkovich-Ohana, A., Glicksohn, J., and Gold stein, A.
(2013). Mindfulness-induced selﬂessness: a MEG neurophenomen ological
study. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 7, 582. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.
00582
Doucet, G., Naveau, M., Petit, L., Delcroix, N., Zago, L., Criv ello, F., et al.
(2011). Brain activity at rest: a multiscale hierarchical fun ctional organization. J.
Neurophysiol. 105, 2753–2763. doi: 10.1152/jn.00895.2010
Esposito, R., Cieri, F., Chiacchiaretta, P., Cera, N., Lauri ola, M., Di
Giannantonio, M., et al. (2018). Modiﬁcations in resting stat e functional
anticorrelation between default mode network and dorsal atte ntion network:
comparison among young adults, healthy elders and mild cognitive impairment
patients. Brain Imag. Behav. 12, 127–141. doi: 10.1007/s11682-017-9686-y
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience /one.tnum/six.tnum frontiersin.org
Tran The et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/five.tnum/six.tnum/eight.tnum/three.tnum/one.tnum
Fair, D. A., Cohen, A. L., Dosenbach, N. U., Church, J. A., Mie zin, F. M., Barch,
D. M., et al. (2008). The maturing architecture of the brain’s default network. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A . 105, 4028–4032. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0800376105
Fodoulian, L., Gschwend, O., Huber, C., Mutel, S., Salazar, R. F. , Leone, R.,
et al. (2020). The claustrum-medial prefrontal cortex network controls attentional
set-shifting. BioRxiv. doi: 10.1101/2020.10.14.339259
Fox, M. D., and Raichle, M. E. (2007). Spontanious ﬂuctuations i n brain activity
observed with functional magnetic resonance imaging. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 8,
700–711. doi: 10.1038/nrn2201
Fox, M. D., Snyder, A. Z., Zacks, J. M., and Raichle, M. E. (2006 ). Coherent
spontaneous activity accounts for trial-to-trial variabilit y in human evoked brain
responses. Nat. Neurosci. 9, 23–25. doi: 10.1038/nn1616
Fransson, P. (2005). Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal ﬂuc tuations: an
fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brai n function hypothesis.
Hum. Brain Mapp. 26, 15–29. doi: 10.1002/hbm.20113
Fransson, P., Skiöld, B., Horsch, S., Nordell, A., Blennow, M., L agercrantz, H.,
et al. (2007). Resting-state networks in the infant brain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S.
A. 104, 15531–15536. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0704380104
Freud, S. (1894). “The neuro-psychoses of defence, ” in Standard Edition, Vol. 3 ,
London: Hogarth Press, 43–61.
Freud, S. (1895). “Project for a scientiﬁc psychology, ” in The Standard Edition
of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, Vol. 1 , London: Hogarth
Press, 283–397.
Freud, S. (1896a). “Heredity and the aetiology of the neurose s, ” in Standard
Edition, Vol. 3 (London: Hogarth Press), 141–156.
Freud, S. (1896b). “Draft K, ” inThe Complete Letters of Sigmund Freud to Wilhelm
Fliess, 1887-1904, ed J. M. Masson (Cambridge and London: The Belknap Press of
Harvard University Press), 162–169.
Freud, S. (1898) “Letter to ﬂiess, 22 nd September 1898, ” in The Complete Letters
of Sigmund Freud to Wilhelm Fliess, 1887-1904 , ed J. M. Masson (Cambridge and
London: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press), 326– 327.
Freud, S. (1900). “The interpretation of dreams, ” in Standard Edition, Vol. 4
(London: Hogarth Press).
Freud, S. (1911). “Psycho-analytic notes on an autobiographi cal account of a case
of paranoia, ” inStandard Edition, Vol. 12 (London: Hogarth Press), 3–82.
Freud, S. (1914). “On narcissism: an introduction, ” in Standard Edition, Vol. 13
(London: Hogarth Press), 67–104.
Freud, S. (1920). “Beyond the pleasure principle, ” in Standard Edition, Vol. 18
(London: Hogarth Press), 7–64.
Freud, S. (1923). “The ego and the Id, ” in Standard Edition, Vol. 19 (London:
Hogarth Press), 1–66.
Freud, S. (1924a). “Neurosis and psychosis, ” in Standard Edition, Vol. 19
(London: Hogarth Press), 149–153.
Freud, S. (1924b). “The loss of reality in neurosis and psychosi s, ” in Standard
Edition, Vol. 19. (London: Hogarth Press), 183–187.
Freud, S. (1925). “A note upon the ≪ mystic writing-pad, ” in Standard Edition,
Vol. 19 (London: Hogarth Press), 227–232.
Freud, S., and Breuer, J. (1895). “Studies on Hysteria, ” in Standard Edition. Vol. 2
(London: Hogarth Press), 1955.
Freud. (1915-1916/1963). Introductory lectures on psycho-analysis: Parts 1 and 2:
1915–1916/The Standard Edition of The Complete Psychological W orks of Sigmund
Freud Freud, Sigmund. London: The Hogarth Press. p. 239.
Friston, K. (2009). The free-energy principle: a rough guide to the brain? Trends
Cogn. Sci. 13, 293–301. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2009.04.005
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: a uniﬁed brain t heory? Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 11, 127–138. doi: 10.1038/nrn2787
Friston, K., Brown, H. R., Siemerkus, J., and Stephan, K. E. (2 016).
The dysconnection hypothesis (2016). Schizophr. Res. 176, 83–94.
doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2016.07.014
Friston, K., Kilner, J., and Harrison, L. (2006). A free energ y principle for the
brain. J. Physiol. Paris 100, 70–87. doi: 10.1016/j.jphysparis.2006.10.001
Friston, K., Rigoli, F., Ognibene, D., Mathys, C., Fitzgerald , T., and Pezzulo,
G. (2015). Active inference and epistemic value. Cogn. Neurosci. 6, 187–214.
doi: 10.1080/17588928.2015.1020053
Friston, K. J. (2003). Learning and inference in the brain. Neural Netw . 16,
1325–52. doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2003.06.005
Friston, K. J., and Frith, C. D. (1995). Schizophrenia – a disc onnection syndrome.
Clin. Neurosci. 1995, 89–97.
Friston, K., Breakspear, M., and Deco, G. (2012). Perception an d self-organized
instability. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 6, 44. doi: 10.3389/fncom.2012.00044
Galindo, L., Berge, D., Murray, G. K., Man?1, A., Bulbena, A., P? rez,1. V., et al.
(2018). Default mode network aberrant connectivity associa ted with neurological
soft signs in schizophrenia patients and unaﬀected relatives. Front. Psychiatry 8,
298. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2017.00298
Garrity, A. G., Pearlson, G. D., McKierna, K., Lloyd, D., Kiehl, K. A.,
and Calhoun, V. D. (2007). Aberrant default mode’ functional c onnectivity in
schizophrenia. Am. J. Psychiatry 164, 450–457. doi: 10.1176/ajp.2007.164.3.450
Genzel, L., Dresler, M., Cornu, M., Jäger, E., Konrad, B., Adamc zyk, M.,
et al. (2015). Medial prefrontal-hippocampal connectivity and mo tor memory
consolidation in depression and schizophrenia. Biol. Psychiatry 77, 177–186.
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2014.06.004
Goulden, N., Khusnulina, A., Davis, N. J., Bracewell, R. M., Bokde ,
A. L., McNulty, J. P., and Mullins, P. G. (2014). The salience netwo rk
is responsible for switching between the default mode network a nd the
central executive network: replication from DCM. Neuroimage 99, 180–190.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.05.052
Gregory, R. L. (1968). Perceptual illusions and brain models. Proc. royal Soc.
London Ser. B. Biol. Sci . 171, 279–296.
Guo, W., Liu, W., F., Chen, J., Wu, R., Li, L., et al. (2017). Hyper activity of the
default-mode network in ﬁrst-episode, drug-naive schizophre nia at rest revealed by
family-based case-control and traditional case-control de signs. Medicine 96, e6223.
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000006223
Gusnard, D. A., and Raichle, M. E. (2001). Searching for a baseli ne:
functional imaging and the resting human brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2, 685–694.
doi: 10.1038/35094500
Helmholtz, H. (1866). “Concerning the perceptions in general”, i n Treatise on
physiological optics. Vol. III, 3rd edn (New York, NY: Dover).
Helmholtz, H. (1882). “On the thermodynamics of chemical proce sses”, in
Physical Memoirs Selected and Translated from Foreign Sources, Vol. 1 (London:
Taylor andFrancis), 43–97.
Hopkins, J. (2016). Free energy and virtual reality in neurosc ience
and psychoanalysis: a complexity theory of dreaming and
mental disorder. Front. Psychol. 7, 922. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.
00922
Hu, M. L., Zong, X. G., Mann, J. J., Zheng, J.-J., Liao, Y.-L., L i, Z.-
C., et al. (2017). A Review of the functional and anatomical de fault mode
network in schizophrenia. Neurosci. Bull. 33, 73–84. doi: 10.1007/s12264-016-
0090-1
Jarzynski,C. (1997). Nonequilibrium equality for free energy d iﬀerences. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 78, 2690. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.78.2690
Kelly, A. M., Di Martino, A., Uddin, L. Q., Shehzad, Z., Gee, D. G.,
Reiss, P. T., et al. (2009). Development of anterior cingulate fu nctional
connectivity from late childhood to early adulthood. Cereb. Cortex 19, 640–657.
doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhn117
Kiebel, S. J., Daunizeau, J., and Friston, K. J. A. (2008). Hie rarchy of time-scales
and the brain. PLoS Comput. Biol . 4, e1000209. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000209
Koubeissi, M. Z., Bartolomei, F., Beltagy, A., and Picard, F. ( 2014). Electrical
stimulation of a small brain area reversibly disrupts conscious ness. Epilepsy Behav.
37, 32–35. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2014.05.027
Lacan, J. (1946). “Presentation on psychical causality, ” in Écrit. The First
Complete English Edition , ed B. Fink (New York, NY, London: W.W.
Norton), 123–158.
Lafargue, G. (2010). “Dernières découvertes”, in Un cerveau jamais au repos”,
Pour la science, n ◦393, ed M. Raichle (Paris: Editions Pour la science), 47.
Laplanche, J., and Pontalis, J. B. (1988). Free energy/ bound en ergy, ” in The
Language of Psycho-Analysis, ed J. Laplanche and J. B. Pontalis (London: Karnac
Books), 171–173.
Lee, H., Lee, D. K., Park, K., Kim, C. E., and Ryu, S. (2019). De fault mode
network connectivity is associated with long-term clinical o utcome in patients with
schizophrenia. NeuroImage Clin. 22, 101805. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2019.101805
Liu, H., Kaneko, Y., Ouyang, X., Li, L., Hao, Y., Chen, E. Y., e t al. (2012)
Schizophrenic patients and their unaﬀected siblings share inc reased resting-state
connectivity in the task-negative network but not its antic orrelated task-positive
network. Schizophr. Bull. 38, 285–294. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbq074
Mallikarjun, P. K., Lalousis, P. A., Dunne, T. F., Heinze, K., Re niers, R. L.,
Broome1, M. R., et al. (2018). Aberrant salience network funct ional connectivity in
auditory verbal hallucinations: a ﬁrst episode psychosis sample. Transl. Psychiatry
8, 96. doi: 10.1038/s41398-018-0118-6
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience /one.tnum/seven.tnum frontiersin.org
Tran The et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/five.tnum/six.tnum/eight.tnum/three.tnum/one.tnum
Molnar-Szakacs, I., and Uddin, L. Q. (2013). Self-processing a nd the default
mode network: interactions with the mirror neuron system. Front. Hum. Neurosci.
7, 571–571. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00571
Mumford, D. (1992). On the computational architecture of the neocortex. II. The
role of cortico-cortical loops. Biol. Cybern 66, 241–251. doi: 10.1007/BF00198477
Ortega, P. A., and Braun, D. A. (2010). A minimum relative entr opy principle for
learning and acting. J. Artif. Intell. Res. 38, 475–511. doi: 10.1613/jair.3062
Oswald, W. (1891). Studien zur Energetik I. Berichte über die Verhandlungen der
Sächsischen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig . 43, 271–288.
Park, J., and Moghaddam, B. (2017). Impact of anxiety on prefro ntal
cortex encoding of cognitive ﬂexibility. Neuroscience 345, 193–202.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2016.06.013
Parr, T., Pezzulo, G., and Friston, K. J. (2022). Active Inference: The Free Energy
Principle in Mind, Brain, and Behavior . Cambridge: MIT Press.
Passow, S., Specht, K., Adamsen, T. C., Biermann, M., Brekke, N., Craven, A.
R., et al. (2015). Default-mode network functional connectiv ity is closely related to
metabolic activity. Hum. Brain Mapp. 36, 2027–2038. doi: 10.1002/hbm.22753
Phan, K. L., Wager, T., Taylor, S. F., and Liberzon, I. (2002). Functional
neuroanatomy of emotion: a meta-analysis of emotion activat ion studies in PET
and fMRI. Neuroimage 16, 331–348. doi: 10.1006/nimg.2002.1087
Prigogine, I. (1967). Introduction to Thermodynamics of Irreversible Processes ,
3rd Edn (New York, NY: John Wiley and Sons).
Prigogine, I., and Stengers, I. (1984). Order Out of Chaos. New York, NY: Bantam.
Rabeyron, T. (2021). Beyond the death drive: entropy and free energy. Int. J.
Psychoanal. 102, 878–905. doi: 10.1080/00207578.2021.1932514
Rabeyron, T. (2022). Psychoanalytic psychotherapies and the f ree energy
principle. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 16, 929940. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2022.929940
Rabeyron, T., and Massicotte, C. (2020). Entropy, free energ y, and symbolization:
free association at the intersection of psychoanalysis and ne uroscience. Front.
Psychol. 11, 366. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00366
Raichle, M. E. (2001). Bold insights. Nature. 412, 128–130. doi: 10.1038/35084300
Raichle, M. E. (2006). Neuroscience. The brain’s dark energy . Science 314,
1249–1250. doi: 10.1126/science.1134405
Raichle, M. E. (2010). Two views of brain function. Trends Cogn. Sci. 14, 180–190.
doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2010.01.008
Raichle, M. E. (2015). The brain’s default mode network. Annu. Rev. Neurosci.
38, 433–447. doi: 10.1146/annurev-neuro-071013-014030
Raichle, M. E., and Gusnard, D. A. (2002). Appraising the brain’s energy budget.
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 99, 10237–10239. doi: 10.1073/pnas.172399499
Raichle, M. E., MacLeod, A. M., Snyder, A. Z., Powers, W. J., Gus nard, D. A., and
Shulman, G. L. (2001). A default mode of brain function. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 98,
676–682. doi: 10.1073/pnas.98.2.676
Ramstead, M. J. D., Badcock, P. J., and Friston, K. J. (2018). Answering
Schrödinger’s question: a free-energy formulation. Phys. Life Rev . 24, 1–16.
doi: 10.1016/j.plrev.2017.09.001
Rao, R. P., and Ballard, D. H. (1999). Predictive coding in the v isual cortex:
a functional interpretation of some extra-classical receptiv e-ﬁeld eﬀects. Nat.
Neurosci. 2, 79–87. doi: 10.1038/4580
Rapaport, D. (1958). The Structure of Psychoanalytic Theory (a Systematizing
attempt) Psychology, A Study of a Science, 3 . New York, NY: S. Koch.
Reichenbach, J. R., Schlösser, R. G., Gaser, C., Sauer, H., and Nenadic, I. (2012)
Default mode network activity in schizophrenia studied at res ting state using
probabilistic ICA. Schizophr. Res. 138, 143–149. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2012.01.036
Salman, M. S., Vergara, V. M., Damaraju, E., and Calhoun, V. D. ( 2019).
Decreased cross-domain mutual information in schizophreni a from dynamic
connectivity states. Front. Neurosci. 13, 873. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2019.00873
Saxe, R., and Kanwisher, N. (2003). People thinking about thin king people:
the role of the temporo-parietal junction in “theory of mind”. NeuroImage 19,
1835–1842. doi: 10.1016/S1053-8119(03)00230-1
Schreber, D. P. (2000). Memoirs of My Nervous Illness, eds I. Macalpine and R. A.
Hunter (New York, NY: New York Review Books).
Sérieux, P., and Capgras, J. (1982). Les folies raisonnantes, le délire
d’interprétation.Marseille: Laﬃte Reprints.
Shannon, B. J., Dosenbach, R. A., Su, Y., Vlassenko, A. G., Lars on-Prior, L. J.,
Nolan, T. S., et al. (2013). Morning-evening variation in huma n brain metabolism
and memory circuits. J. Neurophysiol. 109, 1444–1456. doi: 10.1152/jn.00651.2012
Shim, G., Oh, J. S., Jung, W. H., Jang, J. H., Choi, C.-H., Kim, E ., et al. (2010)
Altered resting-state connectivity in subjects at ultra-hig h risk for psychosis: an
fMRI study. Behav. Brain Funct. 6, 58–58. doi: 10.1186/1744-9081-6-58
Shulman, G. L., Fiez, J. A., Corbetta, M., Buckner, R. L., Miezi n, F., M., et al.
(1997). Common blood ﬂow changes across visual tasks: II. Decr eases in cerebral
cortex. J. Cogn. Neurosci . 9, 648–663. doi: 10.1162/jocn.1997.9.5.648
Skudlarski, P., Jagannathan, K., Anderson, K., Stevens, M. C ., Calhoun, V. D.,
Skudlarska, B. A., et al. (2010). Brain connectivity is not only lower but diﬀerent
in schizophrenia: a combined anatomical and functional approa ch. Biol. Psychiatry
68, 61–69. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2010.03.035
Sokoloﬀ, L., Mangold, R., Wechsler, R. L., Kenney, C., and Kety, S. (1955). The
eﬀect of mental arithmetic on cerebral circulation and metab olism. J. Clin. Investig.
34, 1101–1108. doi: 10.1172/JCI103159
Sokunbi, M. O., Gradin, V. B., Waiter, G. D., Cameron, G. G., Ahear n, T. S.,
Murray, A. D., et al. (2014). Nonlinear complexity analysis of bra in FMRI signals
in schizophrenia. PLoS ONE 9, e95146. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095146
Solms, M. (2013). The conscious id. [and response to commentar ies].
Neuropsychoanalysis 15, 5–85. doi: 10.1080/15294145.2013.10773711
Solms, M. (2019). The hard problem of consciousness and the free energy
principle. Front. Psychol. 9, 2714. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02714
Solms, M., and Friston, K. (2018). How and why consciousness a rises: some
considerations from physics and physiology. J. Conscious Stud . 25, 202–238.
Spreng, R. N., Mar, R. A., and Kim, A. S. N. (2009). The common ne ural
basis of autobiographical memory, prospection, navigation, t heory of mind, and
the default mode: a quantitative meta-analysis. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 21, 489–510.
doi: 10.1162/jocn.2008.21029
Sridharan, D., Levitin, D. J., and Menon, V. (2008). A critic al role for
the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between centra l-executive and
default-mode networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A . 105, 12569–12574.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0800005105
Svoboda, E., McKinnon, M. C., and Levine, B. (2006). The func tional
neuroanatomy of autobiographical memory: a meta-analysis. Neuropsychologia 44,
2189–2208. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2006.05.023
Teves, D., Videen, T. O., Cryer, P. E., and Powers, W. J. (2004 ). Activation of
human medial prefrontal cortex during autonomic responses to hypoglycemia.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 101, 6217–6221. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0307048101
Tononi, G. (2008). Consciousness as integrated information : a provisional
manifesto. Biol. Bull. 215, 216–242. doi: 10.2307/25470707
Tran The, J., Ansermet, J. P., Magistretti, P., and Ansermet , F. (2020). From
the principle of inertia to the death drive: the inﬂuence of the se cond law of
thermodynamics on the Freudian theory of the psychical apparat us. Front. Psychol.
11, 325. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00325
Tran The, J., Magistretti, P., and Ansermet, F. (2018). The e pistemological
foundations of freud’s energetics model. Front. Psychol. 9, 1861.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01861
Tran The, J., Magistretti, P., and Ansermet, F. (2021). Inte roception
disorder and insular cortex abnormalities in schizophrenia: a new perspective
between psychoanalysis and neuroscience. Front. Psychol. 12, 628355.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.628355
Turnbull, O. H., and Solms, M. (2007). Awareness, desire, and fa lse
beliefs: freud in the light of modern neuropsychology. Cortex 43, 1083–1090.
doi: 10.1016/S0010-9452(08)70706-8
Vincent, J. L., Snyder, A. Z., Fox, M. D., Shannon, B. J., Andr ews, J. R., Raichle,
M. E., et al. (2006). Coherent spontaneous activity identiﬁes a hippocampal-parietal
memory network. J. Neurophysiol. 96, 3517–3531. doi: 10.1152/jn.00048.2006
Whitﬁeld-Gabrieli, S., and Ford, J. M. (2012). Default mode net work activity
and connectivity in psychopathology. Annu. Rev. Clin. Psychol. 8, 49–76.
doi: 10.1146/annurev-clinpsy-032511-143049
Whitﬁeld-Gabrieli, S., Thermenos, H. W., Milanovic, S., Tsuan g, M.
T., Faraone, S. V., McCarley, R. W., et al. (2009). Hyperactivit y and
hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in ﬁrst-degree
relatives of persons with schizophrenia. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci . 106, 1279–1284.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0809141106
Yin, B., Terhune, D. B., Smythies, J., and Meck, W. H. (2016). Claustrum,
consciousness, and time perception. Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci. 8, 258–267.
doi: 10.1016/j.cobeha.2016.02.032
Zhao, Z., Li, X., Feng, G., Shen, Z., Li, S., Xu, Y., et al. (2018) .
Altered eﬀective connectivity in the default network of the br ains of
ﬁrst-episode, drug-naive schizophrenia patients with audito ry verbal
hallucinations. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 12, 456–456. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2018.
00456
Zhou, Y., Liang, M., Tian, L., Wang, K., Hao, Y., Liu, H., et al.
(2007). Functional disintegration in paranoid schizophreni a using resting-
state fMRI. Schizophr. Res. 97, 194–205. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2007.
05.029
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience /one.tnum/eight.tnum frontiersin.org