Frontiers in Psychology 01 frontiersin.org
Disgust as a primary emotional 
system and its clinical relevance
Alexey Tolchinsky 
 1*, George F. R. Ellis 
 2, Michael Levin 
 3, 
Šárka Kaňková 
 4 and Jeffrey S. Burgdorf 
 5
1 Professional Psychology Program, George Washington University, Washington, DC, United States, 
2 Department of Mathematics, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa, 3 Allen Discovery 
Center at Tufts University, Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard University, 
Boston, MA, United States, 4 Department of Philosophy and History of Science, Faculty of Science, 
Charles University, Prague, Czechia, 5 Department of Biomedical Engineering, The Falk Center for 
Molecular Therapeutics, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, United States
This paper advocates for considering disgust as a primary emotional system 
within Panksepp’s Affective Neuroscience framework, which has the potential 
to improve the efficacy of psychotherapy with obsessive-compulsive disorder, 
hypochondriasis, and emetophobia. In 2007, Toronchuk and Ellis provided 
comprehensive evidence that DISGUST system, as they defined it, matched all 
Panksepp’s criteria for a primary emotional system. A debate ensued and was 
not unambiguously resolved. This paper is an attempt to resume this discussion 
and supplement it with the data that accumulated since then on DISGUST’s 
relationship with the immune system and the role of DISGUST dysregulation in 
psychopathology. We hope that renewed research interest in DISGUST has the 
potential to improve clinical efficacy with hard-to-treat conditions.
KEYWORDS
disgust, affective neuroscience, psychopathology, OCD, immune system, active 
inference, psychotherapy
Introduction
In a review of the literature on disgust in the past 20 years, Knowles et al. (2018) mentioned 
that the scientific interest in disgust evolved from nearly non-existent when Phillips et al. 
(1998) declared it a “forgotten emotion in psychiatry” to 120 peer-reviewed papers that 
accumulated by 2018. We hope to contribute to this trend by discussing disgust’s broader 
definition as a full-featured, flexible emotional system closely related to the immune system. 
We think that this approach would allow clinicians to better identify disgust dysregulation in 
various kinds of psychopathology and treat it with sufficient priority, which may help improve 
the efficacy of psychotherapy with hard-to-treat clinical conditions.
An example of such a condition is a subtype of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) with 
contamination obsessions and washing compulsions that has an acute onset following exposure to a 
traumatic event (Dykshoorn, 2014; Valderrama et  al., 2020).1 The patients suffering from this 
condition present as having post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) symptoms and OCD symptoms 
concurrently, which significantly increases treatment complexity. Most patients diagnosed with any 
kind of OCD continue to experience substantial residual symptoms after successful initial treatment; 
at least a quarter of OCD patients do not improve with any treatments (Bloch and Pittenger, 2010). 
1 Sometimes, this condition is referred to as “Post-traumatic OCD.”
OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY
Alessandra Maria Passarotti,  
University of Illinois Chicago, United States
REVIEWED BY
Karl Friston,  
University College London, United Kingdom
Jesus Ramirez-Bermudez,  
Manuel Velasco Suárez National Institute of 
Neurology and Neurosurgery, Mexico
*CORRESPONDENCE
Alexey Tolchinsky  
 alexeyt@gwu.edu
RECEIVED 25 June 2024
ACCEPTED 16 August 2024
PUBLISHED 28 August 2024
CITATION
Tolchinsky A, Ellis GFR, Levin M, 
Kaňková Š and Burgdorf JS (2024) Disgust as 
a primary emotional system and its clinical 
relevance.
Front. Psychol. 15:1454774.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1454774
COPYRIGHT
© 2024 Tolchinsky, Ellis, Levin, Kaňková and 
Burgdorf. This is an open-access article 
distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The 
use, distribution or reproduction in other 
forums is permitted, provided the original 
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are 
credited and that the original publication in 
this journal is cited, in accordance with 
accepted academic practice. No use, 
distribution or reproduction is permitted 
which does not comply with these terms.
TYPE Hypothesis and Theory
PUBLISHED 28 August 2024
DOI 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1454774
Tolchinsky et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1454774
Frontiers in Psychology 02 frontiersin.org
A third of the patients with acute PTSD do not reach stable improvement 
with any kind of treatment (Green, 2013). We believe that attending to 
disgust dysregulation early on in treatment is essential for cases of post-
traumatic OCD with contamination obsessions. Similarly, we think that 
attending to disgust functioning early on is important in treating fear of 
vomiting (emetophobia) and illness anxiety (hypochondriasis).
We think that one of the reasons why disgust received less 
attention in psychiatry and clinical psychology compared to fear or 
anger was the viewpoint of some researchers who understood disgust 
as oral distaste. Therefore, prior to discussing disgust in detail, we find 
it useful to define the concepts related to disgust but distinct from it, 
such as distaste, nausea, retching, and vomiting. Toronchuk and Ellis 
(2007a) referred to distaste as animal’s oral rejection of bad tasting 
food. As an illustration, they mentioned an example from Kiefer and 
Orr (1992) of decorticate rats preferring sucrose and rejecting quinine.
Zhong et  al. (2021)  defined nausea, vomiting, and retching 
as follows:
Nausea is the unpleasant sensation of having the urge to 
vomit, whereas vomiting (emesis) is a physical event and is the 
forceful expulsion of intestinal and gastric contents through the 
mouth (Gelberg, 2018). Vomiting is often preceded by retching, 
where the content of gastrointestinal tract is forced into the 
esophagus, without expulsion of the vomitus (Gelberg, 2018). (p.1)
Toronchuk and Ellis (2007a) introduced the DISGUST2 system, 
which “arose phylogenetically in response to danger to the internal 
milieu from pathogens and their toxic products (p. 1799). ” They also 
suggested that DISGUST had the capacity for the anticipatory 
protection of the internal milieu. This capacity is thought to 
be achieved by flexibly using a variety of actions in anticipation of an 
exposure to a potentially noxious material prior to the organism’s 
contact with such material (p. 1800).
Toronchuk and Ellis (2007a) highlighted the difference between the 
organisms’ defense from external threats (e.g., predators), which was the 
function of Panksepp’s (1998) FEAR system, and its defense from noxious 
microorganisms that had the potential to get into the body, which was the 
function of DISGUST. They further inferred that there was a relationship 
between the organism’s immune system and DISGUST and that 
DISGUST was likely phylogenetically older than FEAR.
To summarize, Toronchuk and Ellis (2007a) defined DISGUST as 
a flexible emotional system that was longer lasting than distaste and 
not constrained to the gustatory aversive reaction; it could be activated 
by multiple pathways, including olfactory, visual, or other sensory 
stimuli, and by the higher cognitive processes; it had a function of 
protecting the organism’s internal milieu from pathogens and their 
toxic products by enabling a variety of emotional responses in advance 
of the organism’s contact with potentially noxious material.
As you can see the DISGUST system as defined by Toronchuk and 
Ellis (2007a) is qualitatively different from distaste, which is indeed a 
relatively inflexible, low-level, short-lived phenomenon rather than a full-
featured, flexible emotional system. To illustrate the difference, in the 
above example with decorticate rats, the functioning of the low levels of 
2 Capitalized terms will be used in this paper to in accordance with Panksepp 
(1998) notation for the primary emotional systems.
the brain stem were sufficient for rats to prefer sucrose and reject quinine, 
while the functioning of DISGUST requires subneocortical processing, 
including the insula (Toronchuk and Ellis, 2007a).
Accordingly, the capacity for DISGUT for launching anticipatory 
protective actions in a flexible manner, suggests the use of memory 
systems capable of recording more context and a wider set of choices than 
those involved in a simple reflex. We will describe the recent research on 
such memory systems in the “Neuroanatomical substrates of DISGUST” 
section. As an illustration of a wider range of reactions, in humans, we not 
only avoid the foul-smelling items, but we also have a characteristic facial 
expression (Ekman and Friesen, 1986), which is conceptualized at least in 
part as a social signaling mechanisms to others (Toronchuk and Ellis, 
2007a). To illustrate multiple pathways leading to the activation of 
DISGUST in humans, we think that in addition to taste, smell, and vision, 
Miller’s (1997) example is descriptively rich in reference to tactile 
associations with DISGUST: “slimy, slithery, viscous, oozing, festering, 
scabby, sticky, and moist” (p. 19).3
An additional point of debate is an attempt by some theorists to limit 
DISGUST to nausea, retching or vomiting. We would like to highlight 
our view that nausea, retching, or vomiting are closely related to 
DISGUST in function (Zhong et al., 2021) but are not identical to it in all 
circumstances4 (Fessler et al., 2005; Kaňková et al., 2022; Kaňková et al., 
2023a; Kaňková et al., 2023b; Fejzo et al., 2023). Specifically, a sensation 
of having an urge to vomit is not a necessary component of all DISGUST 
processes. For example, a tactile sensation of “slimy” may activate 
DISGUST, without any food ingestion or nausea. Retching and vomiting 
are relatively inflexible reflexive reactions to noxious material already 
detected in the organism, while DISGUST has the capacity for 
anticipatory protection. We  see oral distaste, nausea, retching, and 
vomiting as only a subset of the possible processes related to DISGUST 
but not identical to it. We summarize the differences in Table 1 below.
In terms of the homeostatic regulation of DISGUST system, the 
homeostatic settling point (Solms, 2018b) is a state where the internal 
milieu is perceived as being safe from pathogens. A negatively 
valenced subjective affect of DISGUST indicates that the internal 
milieu is in danger of infection, the higher the threat and the stronger 
the feeling. When the system is taking actions to minimize this threat, 
the valence becomes positive, as the system is on its way of returning 
to the settling point, and when the settling point is reached, the feeling 
is no longer present, which is the contentment phase of DISGUST.5
3 To add to this list, the disgust-evoking words associated with olfaction can 
include “stinky, putrid, foul, funky;” closely related gustatory associations can 
include “rancid, rotten;” visual associations can include “hideous, grisly.” Some 
of these words can be associated with multiple senses, e.g., “rotten” can 
be visual, olfactory or both.
4 Which is something Panksepp (2007) himself acknowledged.
5 DISGUST can also be conceptualized as participating in the allostatic mechanisms 
of the body. An example can include the upregulated DISGUST accompanying a 
period of partially downregulated immune system in pregnancy. DISGUST can also 
be conceptualized as participating in the allostatic mechanisms of the body. An 
example can include the upregulated DISGUST accompanying a period of partially 
downregulated immune system in pregnancy. This is an anticipatory process, where 
the upregulation of DISGUST is a measure that helps to maintain the protection of 
the internal milieu by proactively compensating for the expected deficit in the immune 
mechanisms of protection. Please see the DISGUST and the Immune System section 
for more details on this process.
Tolchinsky et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1454774
Frontiers in Psychology 03 frontiersin.org
As a clinical illustration, we  suggest that a feeling indicating a 
chronically unmet need (Solms, 2018a) for the internal milieu to be safe 
from pathogens is one of the features of OCD with contamination 
obsessions and washing compulsions. We  would like to add this 
consideration to one of the earlier models described by Jackson and 
Solms (2013) who suggested that OCD was accompanied by dysregulated 
PANIC (Panksepp and Biven, 2012). We  think that DISGUST and 
PANIC can be  dysregulated concurrently, and that DISGUST 
dysregulation should not be reduced to FEAR or PANIC dysregulation, 
since the protection of the internal milieu is a qualitatively different affect 
than the feeling of fear (e.g., of predators) or a feeling of separation distress.
This broader framework of DIGUST allows us to infer a possible 
evolutionary progression from a simple inborn reflex of distaste (e.g., 
preference sucrose and rejection of quinine) to a more flexible system of 
distaste augmented by learning to activate retching and vomiting when 
specific pathogens are detected inside the body, accompanied by a feeling 
of nausea, which facilitates learning to avoid the stimuli associated with 
specific pathogens ( Xie et  al., 2022 ). Then, in the next phase of 
evolutionary development, we can see the previously described systems 
augmented by the most flexible, context-dependent, longer-lasting 
system of DISGUST, working in concert with the immune system, which 
allows sophisticated anticipatory and defensive strategies and the highest 
level of adaptation to the environment. For example, humans can 
be  informed of possible pathogens long before they are exposed to 
contact with these pathogens when seeing a facial expression of disgust 
in others or watching news on TV about the COVID-19 pandemic.
Based on the significantly broader scope, Toronchuk and Ellis 
(2007a) raised a possibility of DISGUST being considered a basic 
emotional system6 on par with Panksepp (1998) SEEKING, FEAR, 
RAGE, LUST, PLAY , CARE, and PANIC.
Panksepp (2007)  outlined the following criteria for basic 
emotional systems:
(1) They should be  accessed by certain unconditional 
environmental stimuli. (2) They should generate a coherent set of 
behavioral actions and supportive physiological responses. (3) 
6 We will use terms “basic emotion” and “primary emotional system” 
interchangeably in this paper.
They should be able to gate inputs from the environment. (4) They 
should be capable of sustaining emotive activity for a substantial 
period after the precipitating events have passed. (5) Emotional 
responses should be  capable of being triggered by cognitive 
activities. (6) Emotions should be  capable of activating and 
regulating complex cognitive strategies. And (7) psychiatrically 
relevant affective experience must be  generated by such brain 
systems. (p. 1820, see text footnote 1)
Toronchuk and Ellis (2007a,b) provided comprehensive review 
of anatomical, functional, phylogenetic, and behavioral data in 
support of DISGUST meeting the first six criteria. We  will not 
repeat all the points they made at length in this paper. As a 
summary, they provided data that (a) DISGUST relied upon the 
distinct neural circuitry (reviewed in the below section 
“Neuroanatomical substrates of DISGUST”), which could 
be unconditionally accessed by various sensory stimuli and not just 
one pathway; (b) that DISGUST system could organize diverse 
behaviors instead of being a relatively simple reflex (e.g., DISGUST 
activation leads to the characteristic facial expression in humans, 
avoidance of conditionally learned stimuli, augmentation of the 
immune system functioning when it is downregulated, etc.); (c) 
change hedonic value in taste or other senses (which simple reflex 
of distaste cannot accomplish); (d) these hedonic changes could 
outlast the immediate exposure to a stimulus; (e) and that DISGUST 
was activating and regulating complex cognitive activities, (e.g., the 
blending of primary DISGUST with complex cognitions leading to 
moral disgust).
In Toronchuk and Ellis (2007b) response to Panksepp (2007) 
critique of their first paper, they subsequently provided data in support 
of Pansepp’s seventh criterion: “psychiatrically relevant affective 
experience must be  generated by such brain systems. ” We  think, 
however, that Panksepp’s seventh criterion is a matter of opinion and 
cannot be independently verified. Unlike malaria or flu, we do not 
have clear, unambiguous, widely agreed-upon etiological explanations 
for most psychiatric conditions; we  have conflicting opinions of 
various theorists, accompanied by ongoing debates. Using the seventh 
criterion to define a basic emotion may therefore be an example of a 
circular logic. Despite such complexity, we will attempt in this paper 
to provide additional data in support of DISGUST’s relevance for 
thinking about psychopathology and clinical work.
TABLE 1 Differences between nausea, vomiting, retching, and DISGUST.
Definition Features
Nausea An unpleasant sensation of having the urge to vomit Affect, related to vomiting
Vomiting A physical event—the forceful expulsion of intestinal and gastric contents through the 
mouth
Action, relatively inflexible
Retching A process where the content of gastrointestinal tract is forced into the esophagus, 
without expulsion of the vomitus
Action, relatively inflexible
DISGUST A flexible emotional system that is longer lasting than distaste and not constrained to 
the gustatory aversive reaction; it can be activated by multiple pathways, including 
olfactory, visual, or other sensory stimuli, and by the higher cognitive processes; it has a 
function of protecting the organism’s internal milieu from pathogens and their toxic 
products by enabling a variety of emotional responses in advance of the organism’s 
contact with potentially noxious material.
A complex emotional system capable of anticipatory protection of 
the organism’s internal milieu. It contains an affective 
component—the feeling of being disgusted, which is qualitatively 
different from nausea; it has flexible and multi-sensory perceptual 
components, memory, connections to the higher cognitive 
processes, and diverse action components.
The definitions of vomiting, retching, nausea are from Zhong et al. (2021).
Tolchinsky et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1454774
Frontiers in Psychology 04 frontiersin.org
We consider this paper in combination with Toronchuk and Ellis 
(2007a,b) work as an attempt to renew research interest in DISGUST 
as a primary emotional system. We realize that more empirical data are 
necessary and hope that this series of papers presents a roadmap for 
future research, including the experimental studies in animals and 
humans, as well as further investigation of the underlying 
neuroanatomy of DISGUST and its dynamics. While this research is 
ongoing, our hope is to provide the framework for necessary 
adjustments in the clinical models and clinical practice, which have 
been negatively affected by viewing disgust as merely distaste or nausea.
In what follows, we  will describe the evolutional origins of 
protecting the internal milieu of any organism. We will then discuss the 
literature that emerged since 2007 on the complex relationship between 
DISGUST and the immune system. Subsequently, we will review the 
neuroanatomical substrates of DISGUST. Then, we  will introduce 
additional terms for emotional concepts relevant to the clinical practice 
and, finally, describe the literature on the diagnosis and treatment of 
clinical conditions, where we think DISGUST plays a major role.
Some constraints in the research 
methodology of affective 
neuroscience
One of the primary experimental methodologies Panksepp and 
colleagues used to map out the neuroaffective systems was deep brain 
stimulation (DBS) in rats ( Panksepp, 1982). Rats are non-emetic 
species—they do not retch or vomit, making it practically difficult to 
come up with observable signs corresponding to their reactions to 
pathogens in their internal milieu or the environment. We think that 
this methodological limitation was the practical constraint of 
investigating disgust in rats or mice for decades, resulting in the 
scarcity of the research literature on disgust in non-emetic species.
To our knowledge, the first rigorous research methodology of 
investigating defensive reactions similar to but not identical with nausea, 
retching, and vomiting in non-emetic species, was developed by Xie et al. 
(2022). Not only they described and tested the specific behavioral signs 
corresponding to retching-like behavior in laboratory mice, but they also 
used a genetic labeling of specific neurons with subsequent chemogenetic 
inactivation of them, which is a more granular technique than 
DBS. These newer methods relying on the Translating Ribosome Affinity 
Purification (TRAP) methodology were not available to Panksepp and 
his colleagues in the 1980s and 1990s, when the bulk of experimental 
studies underlying Panksepp’s affective neuroscience were conducted.
The ancient process of defining and 
determining the internal milieu
Most discussions of physiology, as well as psychology and 
philosophy of mind, take for granted the existence of a self (typically, 
a modern adult human) as the subject of various drives, the owner of 
goals and memories, and the bedrock with respect to which we can 
try to understand behavior and inner experience. But, in seeking the 
origins of fundamental aspects of mind, it is critical to acknowledge 
that all intelligence is collective intelligence: we are made of parts 
(cells), which were once individual organisms themselves, and we all 
began life as a single cell – a quiescent oocyte (Levin, 2019). Each of 
us personally took the remarkable journey from simple matter to 
complex mind, not just on the evolutionary timescale but also on the 
deeply individual timescale of embryogenesis ( Levin, 2022). This 
aspect of metazoan biology emphasizes autopoiesis (self-construction, 
of body and mind) (Maturana and Varela, 1980; Varela et al., 1974) as 
a possible context and origin of fundamental aspects of cognition.
Imagine an amniote blastoderm, with many thousands of cells. 
Each cell is some other cell’s “external world. ” The traditional view is 
that this is one “embryo, ” which will give rise to one “self ” (e.g., a 
human being). But, introducing temporary scratches into this 
blastoderm will result in islands of self-organization, each of which 
will form a separate embryo (Lutz, 1949). If they heal together, the 
result is conjoined twins. Thus, a single blastoderm is a pool of somatic 
and cognitive potentiality, from which may emerge 0, 1, or some 
number of individual Selves. This process reveals that the construction 
of a Self, and its boundary (physical, physiological, and eventually, 
psychological), is not a hardwired, inevitable, genetically-determined 
process but an active example of autopoiesis during which the 
emergent system must autonomously determine where it ends and the 
“outside world” begins (Fields and Levin, 2020, 2023; Friston, 2013; 
Friston et al., 2015; Friston et al., 2020).
Internal models of the self/world boundary are as essential for 
body morphogenesis and physiological allostasis ( McEwen, 1998; 
Schulkin and Sterling, 2019) as they are for subsequent functional 
behavior. The borders of the organism, the available sensors, and 
directly controllable effectors, are not pre-given but must be discovered 
dynamically ( Bongard et  al., 2006 ). Whether during the default 
(singleton) state, or during the more rare twinning events, each 
“embryo” must have a kind of competency to dynamically determine 
which cells are its own components, and which cells are outside world. 
Moreover, the constant threat of parasitisim and various kinds of 
biological hijacking of cellular competencies (Fields and Levin, 2022; 
Levin, 2023) exerts continuous adaptive pressure on biological agents 
to be good at distinguishing not only whether passive features of the 
environment (nearby cells) are part of them or not, but also at the 
second-order task of knowing whether various signaling stimuli (e.g., 
control signals) are being issued by “my own mechanisms” or some 
external agent that seeks to exploit. Thus, it is reasonable to expect that 
neural functions, which are thought to derive from the same 
bioelectrical computational mechanisms used to orchestrate the 
formation of the body (Fields et al., 2020), will retain this fundamental, 
ancient imperative: preserve the boundary between the Self and the 
outside world by detecting and rejecting matter, energy, information, 
and influence that seeks to infiltrate that boundary. This may be an 
origin of a primary sense of disgust, as recognition of a transgressed 
boundary by a “foreign” agent that is judged to be external and not 
belonging inside the somatic or psychological boundary of the Self.
In line with the notion that DISGUST can be seen as a primordial 
aspect of basal cognition, the close relationship between DISGUST 
and the immune system foregrounds the role of the immune system 
in self-organization in the face of environmental challenges, such as 
infection. One key challenge for the immune system is to 
disambiguate between the Self and the Nonself, invoking the notions 
such as Thymic Self (Geenen, 2021), and attendant theoretical 
considerations of what it means to represent the Self at any level 
(Markose, 2022). This issue is particularly relevant in situations 
Tolchinsky et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1454774
Frontiers in Psychology 05 frontiersin.org
where the distinction between the Self and the Nonself becomes 
catastrophically distorted—as in cancer7—or experiences changes—
as in pregnancy. Pregnancy is a particularly interesting example, in 
which a partial, functional down-regulation of the mother’s immune 
response allows the maternal immune system to suspend its attack of 
the Nonself tissue—the fetus. We will return to pregnancy later and 
consider the evidence for a compensatory increase in sensitivity to 
disgust at systemic and conceptual levels.
The evolutionary development of 
DISGUST
Defending against pathogens such as bacteria, viruses, protozoa, 
or helminths, which are ubiquitous in our environment, represents 
one of the most significant driving forces of evolution. DISGUST can 
be seen as a mammalian adaptation to a life threatened by parasites 
and microbes (Curtis et al., 2004). Evolutionarily, it can be seen as a 
very old defense system whose purpose was protection from disease.
Although many different evolutionary perspectives have emerged 
over time to explain the diverse adaptive functions related to disgust 
(e.g., Tybur et al., 2009), one of its functions may have been to serve 
as a mechanism for orally rejecting harmful substances (Rozin and 
Fallon, 1987). Rozin and Fallon (1987) attributed the role of disgust in 
evolution to the advantage of maintaining a clean nest environment, 
as moist and soft body excretions provided a suitable environment for 
the proliferation of microorganisms, and ingesting them could lead to 
the spread of disease.
In line with the protective function of disgust against pathogens, 
Haidt et al. (1994) suggested that disgust in humans was elicited by 
spoiled food, animals carrying infections, body excreta, or low hygiene 
standards. They also noted other circumstances where people could 
experience disgust, such as while looking at wounds, blood, or 
dead bodies.
As human society has evolved, psychological or cultural 
“extensions” of disgust developed, where stimuli that were not 
inherently related to the protection of the internal milieu from 
pathogens were described as “dirty, ” or “clean, ” such as “unclean 
thoughts” or certain kinds of sexual preferences as they are presented 
in religious texts. Chapman and Anderson (2013) referred to this 
phenomenon as “moral disgust” and expressed a viewpoint in 
agreement with Toronchuk and Ellis (2007a) that higher cognitive 
processes could elicit the biological state of disgust8.
7 The consequences of the failure of the immune system to identify the 
cancer cells as NonSelf components can be  perceived as emotionally 
disgusting, e.g., the pictures of cancer on the cigarette packets.
8 The researchers in the field of moral cognition and moral emotions (e.g., 
Moll et al., 2005) have expressed a slightly different viewpoint. They suggested 
that disgust could be a prototypic emotion, that has multiple domains, one of 
which could serve as a foundation for the development of complex moral 
feelings, e.g., the state of moral indignation. They have postulated that 
“condemnatory” emotions such as anger, contempt, disgust, and indignation 
were linked to aggression, and their experimental induction primarily involved 
the amygdala, septal area, hypothalamus, and cingulate cortex. Brain activity 
A related but different phenomenon was a need to distance oneself 
from unwanted sexual contact initiated by others, leading to humans 
reporting feeling disgusted in such circumstances, in addition to being 
scared, helpless, or angry (Brake et al., 2021).
Neuroanatomical substrates of 
DISGUST
Toronchuk and Ellis (2007a,b) described a complex network of 
brain regions participating collectively in DISGUST. They highlighted 
the anterior insular cortex (aIC) as a key region that was necessary but 
likely not sufficient for DISGUST functioning. They summarized 
numerous functional imaging studies in healthy human subjects, as 
well as intracerebral event-related potentials data recorded with depth 
electrodes implanted during presurgical evaluation of patients with 
treatment-resistant temporal lobe epilepsy. Additionally, they 
reviewed studies showing that lesions to aIC in humans disrupted 
both the experience of DISGUST and the recognition of DISGUST in 
others. More recent human functional imaging studies confirmed 
anterior insula as a key region involved in disgust processing (Jabbi 
et al., 2008; Pujol et al., 2018; Gan et al., 2022).
In animal research, conditioned taste aversion (CTA) has been used 
to study some processes related to disgust. CTA is an associative learning 
paradigm, closely associated with avoidance of odors or tastes associated 
with a possible illness. CTA in rats and mice depends on the aIC and the 
amygdala (see Toronchuk and Ellis, 2007a for a review; Tuerke et al., 
2012; Kayyal et al., 2019). Several studies suggest more specifically that 
basolateral amygdala (BLA) is a necessary region involved in CTA 
functioning (Kayyal et al., 2019; Lavi et al., 2018; Inui et al., 2019).
Inui et al. (2019) suggested that BLA was involved in the retrieval of 
CTA-related memories in male rats. Kayyal et al. (2019) conducted 
experiments with mice and made a stronger claim that the activation of 
the neuronal projections from aIC to BLA was necessary and sufficient 
to form and retrieve aversive taste memory. Based on these data, we see 
the memory engrams encoded in a network including the aIC, BLA and 
the projections between then, as a more flexible, programmable memory 
system allowing a wider range of antecedents and responses than the 
memory systems underlying the brainstem-based reflex of distaste.
during “pure disgust” (devoid of moral undertones) or indignation was recorded 
while reading statements such as the following:
“When walking down the street, you see a cat eating its own excrement” 
(Pure Disgust).
“When you get home, you notice that the nanny has put a spider on your child’s 
face” (Indignation).
Although disgust and indignation can be seen by some theorists as emotions 
that belong to the same family, Moll et al. (2005) showed that concomitant 
brain activity presented notable differences. Disgust was associated with 
activation in the amygdala, hippocampus, thalamus, anterior insula, anterior 
cingulate cortex, basal ganglia, and the orbitofrontal and temporal cortices. 
In contrast, indignation correlated with activity in the lateral division of the 
orbitofrontal cortex, anterior prefrontal cortex, insula, anterior cingulate cortex, 
right inferior frontal gyrus, right inferior temporal gyrus, and the anterior 
superior frontal gyrus.
Tolchinsky et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1454774
Frontiers in Psychology 06 frontiersin.org
In addition to aIC and BLA, Toronchuk and Ellis (2007a) reviewed 
three studies by Sprengelmeyer et  al. (1996 , 1997, 2003) with  
human patients diagnosed with Parkinson’s, Huntington’s, obsessive-
compulsive disorders, suggesting a possible role of basal ganglia (BG) 
in DISGUST. Chapman and Anderson (2012) , review suggested 
mixed and inconclusive results with respect to BG’s involvement in 
disgust. One of the possible reasons for that is thought to 
be lateralization—two clinical case reports suggested that only left  
hemisphere lesions in the basal ganglia disrupted DISGUST (Calder 
et al., 2000; Straube et al., 2010). More recently, Holtmann et al. (2020) 
examined eight patients with unilateral damage to the insula – basal 
ganglia system (IC-BG system) and compared them to healthy 
controls. They also concluded that left-hemisphere damage to this 
system impaired disgust. Craig (2002) supported the lateralization of 
functions in the insula. To summarize, more data is needed to clarify 
the possible involvement of BG in DISGUST.
When describing one of the possible processes related to the 
DISGUST activation—reflexive vomiting, Toronchuk and Ellis 
(2007a,b) reviewed studies showing that in mammals, nucleus tractus 
solitarius (NTS) in the medulla was involved. In a more recent review, 
Zhong et al. (2021) expanded the list of the key regions mediating 
vomiting to the brainstem sites located in the dorsal vagal complex 
(DVC) of the medulla, including the area postrema (AP), the NTS, 
and the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus (DMV). An important 
feature of AP and NTS is that they lack the blood–brain barrier, which 
allows the neurons located in these sites to respond quickly to the 
stimuli circulating in blood and cerebrospinal fluid ( Zhong 
et al., 2021).
Neuroanatomy of vomiting or retching has not been tested in 
non-emetic species rigorously prior to 2022, when the results reported 
previously for mammals were essentially supported by Xie et al. (2022) 
experiments. Xie et al. (2022)  replicated retching-like behaviors in 
mice that ingested toxin-contaminated food. Xie et al. (2022) used 
genetic labeling technique to show the abundant activation of neurons 
in the NTS, AP , and DMV . Subsequently, they used chemogenic 
deactivation of these neurons that impaired retching-like behaviors in 
mice that ingested toxins.
Toronchuk and Ellis (2007a) reviewed studies showing that while 
the aIC, the amygdala and the NTS were all involved in DISGUST 
processing, the taste, and interoception pathways that traverse these 
regions differed in rodents and primates. In primates, the amygdala 
appears to receive interoceptive input from the insula (Mesulam and 
Mufson, 1982; Evrard, 2019; Chen et  al., 2021 ) and not via the 
subcortical connections from the NTS, as in rodents. The same can 
be said about the taste inputs to amygdala from the insula in primates 
(Rolls, 1989).9 In addition, the interoceptive pathway in primates and 
not rodents has a direct connection from the NTS to the thalamus, 
bypassing the parabrachial nuclei in the pons ( Craig, 2002). Craig 
interpreted these differences as follows: “These functional anatomical 
considerations indicate clearly that primates differ from sub-primates 
9 Please note that having some connections between the NTS and the 
amygdala via relays in the thalamus or the pons is not contradictory to these 
data. It is critical to look at the specific functional pathways – interoceptive 
and gustatory pathways. These inputs to the amygdala come from the insula 
in primates.
in the encephalization of a direct cortical image of the physiological 
condition of the body (p. 663). ”
The pathway differences between rodents and primates are not 
unique to DISGUST system and are observed in other primary 
neuroaffective systems mapped out by Panksepp et al. For example, 
dorsal striatum is involved in SEEKING system (Alcaro and Panksepp, 
2011); a recent review by Lee et al. (2023) reported that five sensory 
inputs from the cortex and the thalamus converged on the tail of the 
striatum (TS) in rodents, but not in primates. The thalamus plays a 
role in PLAY system (Siviy and Panksepp, 1985) and PANIC system 
(Panksepp and Biven, 2012 ). Joyce et  al. (2021)  showed that in 
primates but not in rodents, the reuniens nucleus (RE) of the thalamus 
contained inhibitory neurons and has robust connections with the 
amygdala. In addition, Morgan and Amaral (2013)   reported that 
primates and rodents have  structural (and likely functional) 
differences in amygdala. We think that these differences can possibly 
affect RAGE and FEAR systems (Panksepp and Biven, 2012).
Lee et  al. (2023)  documented other important differences in 
primate and rodent brains, including developmental, morphological/
anatomical, and functional sensory differences (e.g., higher 
development of visual connections in primates as compared to rodents 
that have relatively poor vision). These data suggest that caution is 
necessary when applying research in rodents to primates, including 
humans. Panksepp and Biven (2012) wrote extensively about this topic 
in Chapter 13 of their book.
An additional level of complexity in species-specific data is Craig’s 
(2002) suggestion that humans and not monkeys have possibly 
developed “sequential re-representations of the physiological state of 
the body in the right anterior insula (p. 663). ” He further inferred that 
this lateralized re-representation in humans corresponded with bodily 
self-awareness.
In line with Panksepp’s model of the primary emotional systems, 
we see DISGUST as a multi-tiered hierarchy. There is an inborn reflex 
of distaste, which can function with brain-stem-based, relatively 
inflexible programs, without the involvement of subneocortical 
structures (Steiner et al., 2001, as cited in Toronchuk and Ellis, 2007a). 
Further up in the hierarchy, perhaps at the secondary level described 
by Panksepp, the components of the DISGUST network including the 
aIC, BLA, and possibly the basal ganglia, allow for more flexible and 
malleable memories involved in the CTA. At a third level of the 
hierarchy, we  may see the most flexible and context-dependent 
neocortex-based learned memories, such as verbal associations. An 
example of a phenomenon at that level could be moral disgust, or 
verbal associations with creepy and oozing objects. As Panksepp and 
Biven (2012)  suggested, there is a complex and dynamic set of 
top-down and bottom-up influences between the three layers, which 
makes the entire system dynamic and evolving in the process of 
development and adaptation.
Toronchuk and Ellis (2007a) illustrate this hierarchical structure 
by an example that lesions to human aIC disrupt both the experience 
of DISGUST and the recognition of DISGUST in others while innate 
distaste responses are found in decerebrate mammals, including 
anencephalic human infants (Steiner et al., 2001).
It is also useful to acknowledge, following Toronchuk and Ellis 
(2007a), that the insula activity occurs not exclusively during 
DISGUST activation but also in other emotional contexts. This 
observation applies to other neuroaffective systems as well, such as the 
amygdala and the thalamus playing a role in at least two primary 
Tolchinsky et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1454774
Frontiers in Psychology 07 frontiersin.org
neuroaffective systems. In part, this phenomenon of a single region 
implicated in multiple emotional systems is related to a clear 
simplification of naming a large and complex part of the brain such as 
the insula as a functionally meaningful and sufficient whole, 
decontextualized from the areas it is connected to (or even mentioning 
one of its parts, such as anterior insula). Indeed, the processing of 
taste, interoceptive and other data in primates is complex and a new, 
more fine-grain model of processing these signals has been proposed 
(Evrard, 2019). Additionally, a one-to-one anatomical to functional 
mapping is inadequate in the brain, nearly every brain region is 
involved in multiple functions and often a single function is performed 
by a network comprising multiple regions (Solms and Turnbull, 2018).
DISGUST and the immune system
In support of Toronchuk and Ellis’ insight that the insula, as one 
of the contributing regions to the DISGUST system was possibly 
related to the immune system’s functioning, 10 Koren et  al. (2021) 
showed experimentally in mice that Insula Cortex (InsCtx) was used 
to both store and retrieve immune-related information. They induced 
colitis with dextran-sulfate-sodium (DSS) as a possible example of 
gastrointestinal inflammation. Then, they used activity-dependent cell 
labeling and compared the mice that were given DSS with controls.
Their results showed that induced colitis in mice was associated 
with increased activation of insula neurons. In the next phase, 4 weeks 
after recovery, they reactivated the specific InsCtx neuronal ensembles 
they observed in the previous experiment and detected heightened 
immune activity in the colon. Subsequently, they repeated these 
experiments with another condition—zymosan-induced peritonitis 
(ZIP), which is immunologically distinct from DSS-induced colitis; 
and they obtained similar results. They also showed that the neuronal 
ensembles in the insula specific to ZIP were distinct from those 
involved in DSS-induced colitis.
In the last two decades, many papers have focused on the relationship 
between DISGUST and the immune system. On the premise that 
DISGUST is the affective part of the so-called “behavioral immune 
system11” ( Schaller and Duncan, 2007 )—an important mechanism 
protecting individuals against pathogens—Fessler and Navarrete (2003) 
formulated the Compensatory Prophylaxis Hypothesis (CPH). This 
hypothesis stated that increased activity in the disgust system functioned 
to augment the protection of the internal milieu when the immune system 
was partially suppressed or downregulated.
The CPH was originally formulated in the context of changes in 
levels of progesterone and associated changes in immunosuppression 
during the menstrual cycle ( Fessler and Navarrete, 2003 ) since 
progesterone was thought to have immunosuppressive effects 
(Miyaura and Iwata, 2002 ). Therefore, in the luteal phase, when 
progesterone is the highest, disgust sensitivity should also be increased 
to compensate for the immunosuppression.
10 A system, which is increasingly tied to issues of embodied cognition 
(Ciaunica et al., 2023a; Halley, 1991).
11 The term “behavioral” is unfortunate in our opinion and likely implies 
“psychological.” Using adjective “emotional” instead of “behavioral” could be a 
better fit.
While some studies supported this hypothesis of CPH’s 
relationship with progesterone levels, (Fleischman and Fessler, 2011; 
Milkowska et al., 2019; Olatunji et al., 2020; Miłkowska et al., 2021; 
Želaźniewicz et al., 2016), others found no correlation between disgust 
and progesterone levels or cycle phase (Fessler and Navarrete, 2003; 
Stern and Shiramizu, 2022; Jones et al., 2018; Timmers et al., 2018). In 
response to the study by Jones et al. (2018) and Fleischman and Fessler 
(2018) argued that disgust responses might have been upregulated to 
partially compensate for reproductive immunomodulation, but that 
progesterone either did not drive such changes or interacted with 
other responsible physiological components. Disgust may also 
be upregulated in relation to other forms of immunomodulation.
Stevenson et al. (2009) found that recently sick people have shown 
increased disgust sensitivity (a measure of how negatively individuals 
consider the experience of disgust, see Haidt et al., 1994), and Sarolidou 
et al. (2020) showed increased disgust sensitivity in people who considered 
themselves more vulnerable to disease. Moreover, recent studies showed 
higher disgust sensitivity in women with an infection in the luteal phase 
of the menstrual cycle (Milkowska et al., 2019) or in women who reported 
recent health problems in the first trimester of pregnancy ( Dlouhá 
et al., 2023).
This period of pregnancy, which is accompanied by significant 
hormonal changes and immunomodulation, is another important area of 
CPH research. Two studies ( Fessler et  al., 2005; Żelaźniewicz and 
Pawłowski, 2015) have shown elevated disgust sensitivity in the first 
trimester, a time of many developmental processes sensitive to disruption 
when the mother and embryo need increased protection against pathogens.
The first direct evidence of immune system activity in association 
with disgust sensitivity in pregnancy was recently provided by Kaňková 
et al. (2022). The authors showed that elevated disgust in the first trimester 
was associated with decreased levels of certain cytokines, proposing that 
disgust compensated for insufficient immune adaptation in early 
pregnancy. Furthermore, Kaňková et  al. (2023a) showed significant 
negative correlations between disgust sensitivity and free β-human 
chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) levels, the hormone contributing to 
establishing pregnancy-induced immune tolerance (Schumacher et al., 
2013), in women in the first trimester of pregnancy. In a follow-up study, 
Kaňková et al. (2023b) reported the activation of the DISGUST system in 
pregnant women in response to the heightened environmental risk of 
infection (such as during the COVID-19 pandemic), was rather weak 
because disgust had already been elevated due to pregnancy.12
Thus, CPH serves as a coherent current model as to why people 
who need to be more protected from infectious diseases (such as more 
12 There are some interesting parallels between pregnancy induced 
immunotolerance and psychopathology that can be linked to the notion of 
sensory attenuation. In brief, the sensory attenuation is the ability of a system 
to ignore certain inputs in order to act. Failures of sensory attenuation have 
been used in attempts to model some psychiatric conditions, including the 
OCD. For example, if a person failed to attenuate interoceptive evidence of 
physiological arousal, she may engage in behaviors that reduce the arousal 
persistently, because she cannot ignore the fact that she is still in a state of 
physiological arousal. The link with pregnancy here is the notion that the partial, 
functional downregulation of the mother’s immune response corresponds to 
the sensory attenuation at an immunological level, allowing the mother to 
bear a child (Bhat et al., 2021).
Tolchinsky et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1454774
Frontiers in Psychology 08 frontiersin.org
vulnerable periods related to women’s reproduction) experience a 
hyper-activation of DISGUST.13
Why is DISGUST being a primary 
emotional system important to 
psychiatrists and psychotherapists?
Sasson et al. (2005) published a descriptive case series of 13 Israeli 
veterans with comorbid OCD and PTSD. The time of OCD onset 
corresponded with exposure to a traumatic event in all 13 cases. 
Moreover, specific OCD symptoms were associated with particular 
types of trauma. As one category of these OCD types, contamination 
obsessions and washing compulsions were prevalent among patients, 
who survived traumatic events where the feeling of intense disgust 
was present.
For example, Sasson et al. (2005) described a case of a patient who 
survived a terrorist attack, resulting in the patient’s body being covered 
with the flesh of the terrorist, and another case of the sexual abuse of 
a patient while he  was in captivity. These patients developed 
contamination obsessions and washing compulsions. Similarly, 
traumatic events related to accidentally harming others were related 
to patients’ checking rituals. Thus, Sasson et al. (2005) inferred that 
specific obsessions and compulsions in posttraumatic OCD were 
related in content to the theme of the trauma. De Silva and Marks 
(1999) came to a similar conclusion; they described a case of a woman, 
who developed a contamination obsession and compulsive washing 
soon after being sexually assaulted.
We think that there is indeed a specific quality of symptoms in 
these cases, and it would be lost if post-traumatic OCD were explained 
as merely an anxiety disorder, basal ganglia disorder, or any other kind 
of overly reductive model. The various symptoms of these patients 
could be considered co-occurring phobias, anxiety disorders, mood 
disorders, sleep disorders, and interpersonal challenges. We think that 
these patients also suffered from dysregulated DISGUST.
We advocate in this paper for a “both-and” approach to these 
clinical cases, as compared to “either-or” models, which suggest that 
these issues can be reduced to a single factor.
For example, consider human reactions to spiders. Panksepp’s 
FEAR system is activated in such experiences; and recent studies 
suggest that arachnophobia could be  innate ( Hoehl et  al., 2017 ). 
However, spiders are also associated with “hairy” or “creepy” concepts 
(Olatunji et al., 2017), which evoke another reaction—DISGUST and 
a threat of contamination or illness in addition to and not instead of 
the perception of spiders as external threats (Polák et al., 2020). The 
same can be said about snakes being perceived as not just scary, but 
also “slimy, ” which evokes DISGUST.
13 In addition to the abovementioned data on the complex relationship 
between the DISGUST and the immune system it is worth mentioning the 
literature on the OCD subtype, which has been conceptualized as being caused 
by autoimmune conditions (Endres et al., 2022). Endres and colleagues used 
the Pediatric Autoimmune Neuropsychiatric Disorder Associated with 
Streptococcal infection (PANDAS) and Pediatric Acute onset Neuropsychiatric 
Syndrome (PANS) to establish the criteria for what they referred to as 
“autoimmune OCD” subtype.
Further, consider on the one hand, the abovementioned definition of 
DISGUST by Toronchuk and Ellis (2007a) as a system protecting the 
organism’s internal milieu from pathogens (p. 1799) and, on another 
hand, health-related anxiety or hypochondriasis. As Knowles et al. (2018) 
suggested, there is likely a relationship between disgust and health-related 
anxiety. We can add that such a relationship seems hardly accidental, 
considering that the activation of DISGUST, as Toronchuk and Ellis 
described it, is precisely supposed to elevate the threat of illness. Finally, 
consider the fear of vomiting (emetophobia). Van Overveld et al. (2008) 
described the evidence of a connection between this phobia and 
disgust sensitivity.
In what follows, we try to make a case that considering DISGUST 
in the understanding and treatment of these conditions from the 
get-go is essential. Before doing that, we  need to discuss some 
additional conceptual factors pertinent to clinical practice.
Additional terminological 
considerations
Adolphs (2017) defined emotions as “functional biological states” 
and he distinguished this term from (a) our conscious experiences of 
emotions, referred to as “feelings” (b) our ability to represent emotions 
and think about them—“emotional concepts” (c) our ability to talk 
about emotions with others—“semantic knowledge of emotions, ” (d) 
behaviors caused by emotional states—“expressions of emotions” (e) 
ability to attribute emotions to others – “attribution. ” One can consider 
the functional biological states and terms (a–e) as various categories 
of terms related to emotions. Adolphs discussed the complex 
relationships between them and the boundaries of each category and 
provided evidence of possible clinical dissociation between some 
of them.
One of the categories Adolphs defined that requires clarification 
is “emotional concepts. ” As an illustration, when a baby integrates 
interoceptive and exteroceptive streams while experiencing low blood 
sugar levels, she establishes a higher-level domain-general 
representation (belief) of an emotional state, such as hunger. This is a 
level of an emotional concept—a higher level of probabilistic belief 
than a domain-specific one (Parr et al., 2022, p.217). Then, with the 
development of language, in a specific environment, the baby learns 
to associate the verbal label “hunger” with this concept—we can 
consider this verbal label to be a part of “semantic knowledge” about 
emotions. To summarize an emotional concept is a likely multi-modal 
semantic memory, which is not identical to semantic knowledge 
about emotions.
Adolphs (2017) showed that an emotional concept can be reliably 
dissociated from an emotional state based on the studies of the patient 
SM who had bilateral lesions to her amygdala. The patient’s emotional 
concept and semantic knowledge of fear were intact, but she did not 
show any signs of experiencing fear.
It seems useful to attempt the translations of Adolphs’ terms to the 
terminology used by other theorists. Panksepp and Biven (2012) refer 
to the “tertiary processes, ” which are “emotional thoughts and 
deliberations (p.14). ” They add:
Multiple emotional streams may cross in the thinking mind, 
creating an enormous variety of higher emotions that are often the 
Tolchinsky et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1454774
Frontiers in Psychology 09 frontiersin.org
focus of psychologists—pride, shame, confidence, guilt, jealousy, 
trust, disgust,14 dominance, and so forth with hundreds of possible 
variants. (p.15)
Paksepp and Biven thus acknowledge an increase in variability when 
moving from primary to tertiary level. We think that DISGUST, no less 
than Panksepp’s seven emotional systems, is a multi-tiered hierarchy. The 
first, instinctual level is described in Toronchuk and Ellis (2007a). At the 
secondary level, we can consider possible learning facilitated by aIC, BLA 
and their interconnections in acquiring knowledge of what is “clean/safe” 
and what is “dirty/pathogenic. ” Maladaptive learning at that level, may 
contribute to clinical syndromes, such as contamination obsessions and 
washing compulsions based on misidentifications of the safe stimuli as 
noxious and based on a failure to update the inaccurate beliefs despite the 
data arriving from in the environment. At the tertiary level, we  can 
consider psychological extensions of disgust described earlier, often 
culturally influenced, where stimuli or activities that are not inherently 
related to the protection of the body from pathogens are described as 
“dirty, ” or “clean, ” such as “unclean thoughts. ”
Solms, following Freud’s definition, defined affect as the subjective 
aspect of the drive (Solms, 2021). Our reading of Solms’ terminology 
suggests that his definition of affect is analogous to what Adolphs calls 
“emotional experience” or “feelings. ” Due to the subjective nature of 
affects, they are accessible only to the person experiencing them, 
unlike emotional expressions, including facial expressions, which can 
be observed by others.15
How does this terminology apply to 
psychotherapy?
Behavioral psychotherapists, when working with OCD or phobias 
typically target interventions at the level of emotional expressions in 
Adolphs’ terms, such as the ritual prevention component in Exposure and 
Ritual Prevention (EX-RP) therapy. The exposure to a threatening or 
disgusting stimulus or context is a behavioral intervention in and of itself, 
where the patient’s behavior is the starting point. However, in the process 
of such exposure, the patient experiences feelings and is also likely 
exposed to the activation of emotional concepts. With that, phobic 
14 Please note that “disgust” they refer to here is the tertiary form of disgust, 
not the primary sensory emotion of disgust in Panksepp’s classification system.
15 In addition to the terminology listed in this section, we can add a comment 
about the distinction between an emotional concept and an emotional feeling/
affect per se. This can be described in Active Inference framework (Parr et al., 
2022) as an emotional inference. In this framework, an emotion as a 
(propositional) concept is the representation of the state of Self that best 
explains both the interoceptive and exteroceptive evidence, where the 
interoceptive evidence could include the status of the immune system or the 
neurohormonal systems mediating DISGUST at lower scales. One interesting 
aspect of this view is that some individuals may have a diminished ability to 
recognize their emotional states (e.g., in alexithymia); these circumstances 
may be an appropriate fit for the therapeutic revision via mentalizing the 
individual’s physiology or homeostasis ( Ainley et al., 2016; Fotopoulou and 
Tsakiris, 2017).
memories are unlikely to be extinguished in the process of exposure; what 
may happen instead is the formation of a new memory, which associates 
a previously threatening stimulus or context with a more benign reaction.
In psychodynamic psychotherapy, when the patient describes his 
experiences to the therapist, he shares data at the level of recollections of 
his past experiences, which he reflected on, classified, and labeled to the 
best of his abilities. There may be an explanatory gap in the patient’s 
narrative, where he reports suffering from discomfort that he is unable to 
name or describe. However, the level of verbal exchanges between the 
patient and the therapist is the level of semantic knowledge about 
emotions, not the level of functional biological states in Adolphs’ terms. 
Additionally, the patient may cry in a session, which, according to 
Adolphs, is an expression of an emotion.
The therapist may feel something in a session, which is the therapist’s 
affect. In psychodynamic psychotherapy, the therapist may choose to (a) 
classify her affective state verbally as, say, a “wish to care for the patient” 
(b) infer that this is countertransference, implying that this particular 
affect is related to the work in the therapeutic dyad (c) further infer that 
such countertransference is data in support of the patient either wishing 
to be cared for (complimentary countertransference), or of his wishing to 
care for others (concordant countertransference). The therapist may then 
incorporate her countertransferential impressions with other data into a 
preliminary psychodynamic formulation.
Panksepp and Biven (2012) acknowledged that psychotherapists 
interact with the patient at the tertiary level, not at the level of primary 
emotions (p. 25). Indeed, the patient does not talk to us, nor does 
he express his emotional states at the Panksepp’s primary level.16 The 
data we collect in psychodynamic therapy is what has been outlined 
above—the patient’s semantic knowledge, his expressions of emotions, 
his recollections, the therapist’s affects, and inferences about them. It 
is unlikely that we collect data directly at the level of the patient’s 
primary, instinctual emotional systems.
Therefore, should the therapist choose to attempt to classify the 
patient’s emotional distress by inferring which patient’s primary 
emotional systems are dysregulated, he would be making an inference 
two levels down in Panksepp’s hierarchy from the data collected. One 
possible example of such an inference seems to be made in the paper 
by Jackson and Solms (2013). They stated that separation distress/
PANIC system was strongly implicated in OCD.
Psychopathology and treatment for 
OCD, hypochondriasis, and health 
anxiety17
Athey et al. (2015) conducted a longitudinal study of 134 adult 
patients with severe OCD who received intensive residential 
treatment. The authors showed that at admission the patient’s disgust 
propensity (a person’s likelihood to experience disgust) was 
significantly associated with contamination/washing symptoms, but 
16 A more precise statement would be that we hear narrative or see behavior, 
or experience feelings; and then we form a probabilistic belief (inference) about 
which Panksepp’s level these phenomena belong to.
17 These studies are reviewed in addition to the clinical literature already 
reported by Toronchuk and Ellis (2007a,b).
Tolchinsky et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1454774
Frontiers in Psychology 10 frontiersin.org
not hoarding, symmetry, or checking symptoms. Further, they have 
shown that at discharge disgust propensity improved and a reduction 
of disgust propensity was significantly associated with improvements 
in contamination/washing symptoms, but not symptoms in other 
domains. On this basis, the authors concluded that changes in disgust 
propensity can be considered predictive of changes in contamination/
washing symptoms of OCD.
Knowles et al. (2016)  conducted a similar study among 472 
adolescents, 243 of whom had severe OCD and underwent 
residential treatment. In addition, the authors administered 
disgust proneness measures to adolescents with a primary mood 
disorder or a primary anxiety disorder diagnosis and not primary 
OCD. The results showed that a reduction in disgust proneness 
during treatment was significantly associated with reductions in 
multiple symptoms and that the strongest correlations were 
between reductions in disgust proneness and OCD symptoms. 
They did not infer a one-way causal relationship between disgust 
proneness and OCD but hypothesized about a reciprocal 
relationship between the two concepts.
In a pediatric study of 111 children diagnosed with OCD, 
Cervin and Perrin (2021)  have shown that high levels of disgust 
and incompleteness measured at baseline predicted poorer 
treatment outcomes of behavioral therapy. They clarified that the 
felt sense of incompleteness was a feeling that things were “just 
not right” (p.  54). They assessed the three dimensions—fear, 
disgust, and incompleteness with Swedish versions of children’s 
Obsessive-Compulsive Core Dimensions Interview (OC-CDI) as 
part of the Dimensional Y ale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale 
(DY-BOCS) interview with an item of disgust added to fear and 
incompleteness. The degree of fear at baseline was not predictive 
of the outcome. The study included a 13-month follow-up, but it 
was not controlled. 18 Should their results be  confirmed in a 
replicated and controlled study, Cerbin and Perry suggested that 
future treatment modifications that would target incompleteness 
and disgust could improve outcomes for at least a subset of 
children suffering from OCD.
Davey and Bond (2006)  investigated a relationship between 
disgust, hypochondriasis, and health anxiety in adult patients. They 
have found highly significant correlations between trait disgust and 
disgust sensitivity and hypochondriasis and health anxiety; these 
correlations remained significant when trait anxiety was controlled 
for, which confirmed the results reported in an earlier study by Thorpe 
et al. (2003). Trait disgust and disgust sensitivity were measured with 
disgust propensity and sensitivity scales (DPSS); disgust sensitivity 
was additionally assessed with disgust sensitivity questionnaire (DSQ).
Summary
The boundaries we  draw between various bodily systems 
could be  driven at times by the necessity to limit model 
complexity more so than by the data we collect. As an example, 
Ciaunica et  al. (2023b)  showed how truly complex and 
18 Childhood-onset OCD is thought to have a higher level of heritability than 
adult-onset OCD (see Bloch and Pittenger, 2010 for a comprehensive review).
intertwined were the immune systems of the baby and the mother 
in pregnancy. While in a single human body the immune, 
endocrine, and central nervous systems are already tightly 
interrelated, in pregnancy there is an even more complex, 
delicate, and finely tuned balance of the mother’s systems, fetus’ 
systems, and the placenta. It could be that a functional task of 
protecting the internal milieu of a single organism or the nested 
system of several organisms, is the primary entity to consider, 
while a collection of various systems and tools of protection can 
change and evolve adaptively.
With these caveats in mind, our paper suggests that 
considering DISGUST as a primary emotional system likely 
brings theoretical and clinical benefits, including 
psychotherapeutic work with OCD, health anxiety, and other 
conditions where DISGUST plays a significant role. Our paper 
suggests that DISGUST is a complex and multilayered emotional 
system. We added data to Toronchuk and Ellis (2007a ,b) work in 
support of DISGUST being a full-featured primary emotional 
system in Panksepp’s (1998)  taxonomy, on par with SEEKING, 
LUST, CARE, PANIC, FEAR, RAGE, and PLAY .
In addition, we provided data in support of DISGUST acting 
as an affective partner of the immune system where both systems 
often work in concert on the same functional goal of protecting 
the internal milieu of the organism. Only by a comprehensive 
approach to all aspects of DISGUST can we  gain a deeper 
understanding of the functioning of this system and further 
integrate this knowledge into clinical practice. It is also important 
to recognize that this system can be regulated by both external 
factors (such as learning, culture, and traumatic experiences) and 
internal physiological factors (such as hormones and immunity).
As noted in the section “Introduction, ” we see this paper as a 
roadmap, which can help facilitate further research, theoretical 
developments, and clinical models. Specifically, we  need: (a) 
more experimental data on DISGUST with rodents, as the 
experimental paradigm of observable retching-like behaviors was 
introduced only recently by Xie et al. (2022) ; (b) more evidence 
to clarify the possible role of the basal ganglia’s involvement in 
DISGUST; (c) more experimental data on the lateralization of 
functions in the insula and the basal ganglia; (d) more data to 
clarify the influence of the interoceptive and taste pathway 
differences between rodents and primates on the applications of 
rodent experiments to primates; (e) more data on the possible 
uniquely human re-representations in the insula suggested by 
Craig (2002) .
We are hopeful that clinical models and their applications in 
psychotherapy and pharmacological therapy can consider the 
significant role of DISGUST in psychopathology. As applied to 
psychodynamic psychotherapy, we  hope that our paper and the 
continued research on DISGUST would allow the psychodynamic 
theorists and clinicians to revise their theories of mental distress and 
therapeutic approaches. For some psychodynamic theorists, such as 
Nancy McWilliams, who studied with Silvan Tomkins, DISGUST has 
never lost its priority. However, in the neuropsychoanalysis 
community, where the clinical models are built on the foundation of 
Panksepp’s Affective Neuroscience—DISGUST is rarely if ever 
discussed in clinical case conferences, trainings, and lectures. We hope 
that our paper along with Toronchuk and Ellis’s work can help correct 
this omission.
Tolchinsky et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1454774
Frontiers in Psychology 11 frontiersin.org
Data availability statement
The original contributions presented in the study are included in 
the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can be directed 
to the corresponding author.
Author contributions
AT: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. GE: 
Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Methodology, Writing – 
review & editing. ML: Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing – 
original draft. ŠK: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft. JB: 
Writing – review & editing.
Funding
The author(s) declare that financial support was received for 
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. ML 
gratefully acknowledges support from the Elisabeth Giauque 
Trust, London, and Grant 62212 from the John Templeton 
Foundation. ŠK acknowledges support from the Czech  
Science Foundation, project GAČR 23-05519S. GE acknowledges 
support from the University of Cape Town Research  
Committee.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Loring Ingraham for his valuable comments.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the 
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and 
do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those 
of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may 
be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, 
is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.
Author disclaimer
The opinions expressed in this publication are those of the 
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the John 
Templeton Foundation.
References
Adolphs, R. (2017). How should neuroscience study emotions? By distinguishing 
emotion states, concepts, and experiences. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 12, 24–31. doi: 
10.1093/scan/nsw153
Ainley, V ., Apps, M. A., Fotopoulou, A., and Tsakiris, M. (2016). ‘Bodily precision’: a 
predictive coding account of individual differences in interoceptive accuracy. Philos. 
Trans. Royal Soc. B Biol. Sci. 371:20160003. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2016.0003
Alcaro, A., and Panksepp, J. (2011). The SEEKING mind: primal neuro-affective 
substrates for appetitive incentive states and their pathological dynamics in addictions 
and depression. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.  35, 1805–1820. doi: 10.1016/j.
neubiorev.2011.03.002
Athey, A. J., Elias, J. A., Crosby, J. M., Jenike, M. A., Pope, H. G. Jr., Hudson, J. I., et al. 
(2015). Reduced disgust propensity is associated with improvement in contamination/
washing symptoms in obsessive–compulsive disorder. J. Obs. Comp. Related Disorders 
4, 20–24. doi: 10.1016/j.jocrd.2014.11.001
Bhat, A., Parr, T., Ramstead, M., and Friston, K. (2021). Immunoceptive inference: 
why are psychiatric disorders and immune responses intertwined? Biol. Philos. 36:27. 
doi: 10.1007/s10539-021-09801-6
Bloch, M., and Pittenger, C. (2010). The genetics of obsessive-compulsive disorder. 
Curr. Psychiatr. Rev. 6, 91–103. doi: 10.2174/157340010791196439
Bongard, J., Zykov, V ., and Lipson, H. (2006). Resilient machines through continuous 
self-modeling. Science 314, 1118–1121. doi: 10.1126/science.1133687
Brake, C. A., Tipsword, J. M., and Badour, C. L. (2021). Mental contamination, disgust, 
and other negative emotions among survivors of sexual trauma: results from a daily 
monitoring study. J. Anxiety Disord. 84:102477. doi: 10.1016/j.janxdis.2021.102477
Calder, A. J., Keane, J., Manes, F ., Antoun, N., and Y oung, A. W . (2000). Impaired 
recognition and experience of disgust following brain injury. Nat. Neurosci.  3, 
1077–1078. doi: 10.1038/80586
Cervin, M., Perrin, S. (2021). Incompleteness and disgust predict treatment outcome 
in pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder. Behavior Therapy, 52, 53–63. doi: 10.1016/j.
beth.2020.01.007
Chapman, H. A., and Anderson, A. K. (2012). Understanding disgust. Ann. N. Y. Acad. 
Sci. 1251, 62–76. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2011.06369.x
Chapman, H. A., and Anderson, A. K. (2013). Things rank and gross in nature: a review 
and synthesis of moral disgust. Psychol. Bull. 139, 300–327. doi: 10.1037/a0030964
Chen, W . G., Schloesser, D., Arensdorf, A. M., Simmons, J. M., Cui, C., Valentino, R., 
et al. (2021). The emerging science of interoception: sensing, integrating, interpreting, 
and regulating signals within the self. Trends Neurosci. 44, 3–16. doi: 10.1016/j.
tins.2020.10.007
Ciaunica, A., Levin, M., Rosas, F ., and Friston, K. (2023b). Nested selves: self-
organisation and shared Markov blankets in prenatal development in humans. Topics 
Sci, 1–23. doi: 10.1111/tops.12717
Ciaunica, A., Shmeleva, E. V ., and Levin, M. (2023a). The brain is not mental! 
Coupling neuronal and immune cellular processing in human organisms. Front. Integr. 
Neurosci. 17:1057622. doi: 10.3389/fnint.2023.1057622
Craig, A. D. (2002). How do you feel? Interoception: the sense of the physiological 
condition of the body. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3, 655–666. doi: 10.1038/nrn894
Curtis, V ., Aunger, R., and Rabie, T. (2004). Evidence that disgust evolved to protect 
from risk of disease. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. B Biol. Sci. 271, S131–S133. doi: 10.1098/
rsbl.2003.0144
Davey, G. C., and Bond, N. (2006). Using controlled comparisons in disgust 
psychopathology research: the case of disgust, hypochondriasis and health anxiety. J. 
Behav. Ther. Exp. Psychiatr. 37, 4–15. doi: 10.1016/j.jbtep.2005.09.001
de Silva, P ., and Marks, M. (1999). The role of traumatic experiences in the genesis of 
obsessive–compulsive disorder. Behav. Res. Ther.  37, 941–951. doi: 10.1016/
S0005-7967(98)00185-5
Dlouhá, D., Roberts, S. C., Hlaváčová, J., Nouzová, K., and Kaňková, Š. (2023). 
Longitudinal changes in disgust sensitivity during pregnancy and the early postpartum 
period, and the role of recent health problems. Sci. Rep.  13:4752. doi: 10.1038/
s41598-023-31060-6
Dykshoorn, K. L. (2014). Trauma-related obsessive–compulsive disorder: a review. 
Health Psychol. Behav. Med. Open Access J. 2, 517–528. doi: 10.1080/21642850.2014.905207
Ekman, P ., and Friesen, W . V . (1986). A new pan-cultural facial expression of emotion. 
Motiv. Emot. 10, 159–168. doi: 10.1007/BF00992253
Endres, D., Pollak, T. A., Bechter, K., Denzel, D., Pitsch, K., Nickel, K., et al. 
(2022). Immunological causes of obsessive-compulsive disorder: is it time for the 
concept of an “autoimmune OCD” subtype? Transl. Psychiatry  12:5. doi: 10.1038/
s41398-021-01700-4
Evrard, H. C. (2019). The organization of the primate insular cortex. Front. Neuroanat. 
13:43. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2019.00043
Tolchinsky et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1454774
Frontiers in Psychology 12 frontiersin.org
Fejzo, M., Rocha, N., Cimino, I., Lockhart, S. M., Petry, C. J., Kay, R. G., et al. (2023). 
GDF15 linked to maternal risk of nausea and vomiting during pregnancy. Nature 625, 
760–767. doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06921-9
Fessler, D., Eng, S., and Navarrete, C. (2005). Elevated disgust sensitivity in the first 
trimester of pregnancy – evidence supporting prophylaxis the compensatory hypothesis. 
Evol. Hum. Behav. 26, 344–351. doi: 10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2004.12.001
Fessler, D., and Navarrete, C. (2003). Domain-specific variation in disgust sensitivity 
across the menstrual cycle. Evol. Hum. Behav.  24, 406–417. doi: 10.1016/
S1090-5138(03)00054-0
Fields, C., Bischof, J., and Levin, M. (2020). Morphological coordination: a common 
ancestral function unifying neural and non-neural signaling. Physiology 35, 16–30. doi: 
10.1152/physiol.00027.2019
Fields, C., and Levin, M. (2020). Scale-free biology: integrating evolutionary and 
developmental thinking. Bio Essays 42:e1900228. doi: 10.1002/bies.201900228
Fields, C., and Levin, M. (2022). Competency in navigating arbitrary spaces as an 
invariant for analyzing cognition in diverse embodiments. Entropy 24:819. doi: 10.3390/
e24060819
Fields, C., and Levin, M. (2023). Regulative development as a model for origin of life 
and artificial life studies. Biosystems 229:104927. doi: 10.1016/j.biosystems.2023.104927
Fleischman, D. S., and Fessler, D. M. (2011). Progesterone's effects on the psychology 
of disease avoidance: support for the compensatory behavioral prophylaxis hypothesis. 
Horm. Behav. 59, 271–275. doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2010.11.014
Fleischman, D. S., and Fessler, D. M. T. (2018). Response to “hormonal correlates of 
pathogen disgust: testing the compensatory prophylaxis hypothesis” . Evol. Hum. Behav. 
39, 468–469. doi: 10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2018.03.006
Fotopoulou, A., and Tsakiris, M. (2017). Mentalizing homeostasis: the social origins 
of interoceptive inference. Neuropsychoanalysis 19, 3–28. doi: 
10.1080/15294145.2017.1294031
Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it. J. R. Soc. Interface 10:20130475. doi: 10.1098/
rsif.2013.0475
Friston, K., Levin, M., Sengupta, B., and Pezzulo, G. (2015). Knowing one's place: a 
free-energy approach to pattern regulation. J. R. Soc. Interface 12:20141383. doi: 10.1098/
rsif.2014.1383
Friston, K. J., Wiese, W ., and Hobson, J. A. (2020). Sentience and the origins of 
consciousness: from Cartesian duality to Markovian monism. Entropy 22:516. doi: 
10.3390/e22050516
Gan, X., Zhou, X., Li, J., Jiao, G., Jiang, X., Biswal, B., et al. (2022). Common and 
distinct neurofunctional representations of core and social disgust in the brain: 
coordinate-based and network meta-analyses. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 135:104553. doi: 
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2022.104553
Geenen, V . (2021). The thymus and the science of self. Seminars Immunopathol. 43, 
5–14. doi: 10.1007/s00281-020-00831-y
Gelberg, H. (2018). Pathophysiological mechanisms of gastrointestinal toxicity. 
Compr. Toxicol. 21, 139–178. doi: 10.1016/b978-0-12-801238-3.10923-7
Green, B. (2013). Post-traumatic stress disorder: new directions in pharmacotherapy. 
Adv. Psychiatr. Treat. 19, 181–190. doi: 10.1192/apt.bp.111.010041
Haidt, J., McCauley, C., and Rozin, P . (1994). Individual differences in sensitivity to 
disgust: a scale sampling seven domains of disgust elicitors. Personal. Individ. Differ. 16, 
701–713. doi: 10.1016/0191-8869(94)90212-7
Halley, F . M. (1991). Self-regulation of the immune system through biobehavioral 
strategies. Biofeedback Self Regul. 16, 55–74. doi: 10.1007/BF01000446
Hoehl, S., Hellmer, K., Johansson, M., and Gredebäck, G. (2017). Itsy bitsy spider…: 
infants react with increased arousal to spiders and snakes. Front. Psychol. 8:1710. doi: 
10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01710
Holtmann, O., Bruchmann, M., Mönig, C., Schwindt, W ., Melzer, N., Miltner, W . H. 
R., et al. (2020). Lateralized deficits of disgust processing after insula-basal ganglia 
damage. Front. Psychol. 11:1429. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01429
Inui, T., Sugishita, T., Inui-Y amamoto, C., Y asoshima, Y ., and Shimura, T. (2019). The 
basolateral nucleus of the amygdala executes the parallel processes of avoidance and 
palatability in the retrieval of conditioned taste aversion in male rats. Eneuro 
6:ENEURO.0004. doi: 10.1523/eneuro.0004-19.2019
Jabbi, M., Bastiaansen, J., and Keysers, C. (2008). A common anterior insula 
representation of disgust observation, experience and imagination shows divergent 
functional connectivity pathways. PLoS One  3:e2939. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0002939
Jackson, M., and Solms, M. (2013). Separation distress in obsessive-compulsive 
disorder. Neuropsychoanalysis 15, 117–125. doi: 10.1080/15294145.2013.10799825
Jones, B. C., Hahn, A. C., Fisher, C. I., Wang, H., Kandrik, M., Lee, A. J., et al. 
(2018). Hormonal correlates of pathogen disgust: testing the compensatory 
prophylaxis hypothesis. Evol. Hum. Behav.  39, 166–169. doi: 10.1016/j.
evolhumbehav.2017.12.004
Joyce, M. K. P ., Marshall, L. G., Banik, S. L., Wang, J., Xiao, D., Bunce, J. G., et al. 
(2021). Pathways for memory, cognition and emotional context: hippocampal, 
Subgenual area 25, and Amygdalar axons show unique interactions in the primate 
thalamic Reuniens nucleus. J. Neurosci.  42, 1068–1089. doi: 10.1523/
jneurosci.1724-21.2021
Kaňková, Š., Hlaváčová, J., Roberts, K., Benešová, J., Havlíček, J., Calda, P ., et al. 
(2023a). Associations between nausea and vomiting in pregnancy, disgust sensitivity, 
and first-trimester maternal serum free β-hCG and PAPP-A. Horm. Behav. 152:105360. 
doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2023.105360
Kaňková, Š., Takács, L., Hlaváčová, J., Calda, P ., Monk, C., and Havlíček, J. (2023b). 
Disgust sensitivity in early pregnancy as a response to high pathogen risk. Front. Psychol. 
14:1015927. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1015927
Kaňková, Š., Takács, L., Krulová, M., Hlaváčová, J., Nouzová, K., Hill, M., et al. (2022). 
Disgust sensitivity is negatively associated with immune system activity in early 
pregnancy: direct support for the compensatory prophylaxis hypothesis. Evol. Hum. 
Behav. 43, 234–241. doi: 10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2022.02.001
Kayyal, H., Yiannakas, A., Chandran, S. K., Khamaisy, M., Sharma, V ., and 
Rosenblum, K. (2019). Activity of insula to basolateral amygdala projecting neurons is 
necessary and sufficient for taste valence representation. J. Neurosci. 39, 9369–9382. doi: 
10.1523/jneurosci.0752-19.2019
Kiefer, S. W ., and Orr, M. R. (1992). Taste avoidance, but not aversion, learning in rats 
lacking gustatory cortex. Behav. Neurosci.  106, 140–146. doi: 
10.1037//0735-7044.106.1.140
Knowles, K. A., Jessup, S. C., and Olatunji, B. O. (2018). Disgust in anxiety and 
obsessive-compulsive disorders: recent findings and future directions. Curr. Psychiatry 
Rep. 20, 68–10. doi: 10.1007/s11920-018-0936-5
Knowles, K. A., Viar-Paxton, M. A., Riemann, B. C., Jacobi, D. M., and Olatunji, B. O. 
(2016). Is disgust proneness sensitive to treatment for OCD among youth?: examination 
of diagnostic specificity and symptom correlates. J. Anxiety Disord.  44, 47–54. doi: 
10.1016/j.janxdis.2016.09.011
Koren, T., Amer, M., Krot, M., Boshnak, N., Ben-Shaanan, T. L., Azulay-Debby, H., 
et al. (2021). Insular cortex neurons encode and retrieve specific immune responses. Cell 
184, 5902–5915. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2021.10.013
Lavi, K., Jacobson, G. A., Rosenblum, K., and Lüthi, A. (2018). Encoding of 
conditioned taste aversion in Cortico-amygdala circuits. Cell Rep. 24, 278–283. doi: 
10.1016/j.celrep.2018.06.053
Lee, K., An, S. Y ., Park, J., Lee, S., and Kim, H. F . (2023). Anatomical and functional 
comparison of the caudate tail in primates and the tail of the striatum in rodents: 
Implications for sensory information processing and habitual behavior. Molecules and 
Cells, 46, 461–469. doi: 10.14348/molcells.2023.0051
Levin, M. (2019). The computational boundary of a “self ”: developmental 
bioelectricity drives multicellularity and scale-free cognition. Front. Psychol. 10:2688. 
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02688
Levin, M. (2022). Technological approach to mind everywhere: an experimentally-
grounded framework for understanding diverse bodies and minds. Front. Syst. Neurosci. 
16:768201. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2022.768201
Levin, M. (2023). “Collective intelligence of morphogenesis as a teleonomic process” 
in Evolution “on purpose”: teleonomy in living systems. eds. P . A. Corning, S. A. 
Kauffman, D. Noble, J. A. Shapiro, R. I. Vane-Wright and A. Pross (Cambridge: MIT 
Press), 175–198.
Lutz, H. (1949). Sur la production experimentale de la polyembryonie et de la 
monstruosite double chez les oiseaux. Archs Anat. Microsc. Morph. Exp. 38, 79–144.
Markose, S. M. (2022). Complexification of eukaryote phenotype: adaptive immuno-
cognitive systems as unique Gödelian blockchain distributed ledger. Biosystems 
220:104718. doi: 10.1016/j.biosystems.2022.104718
Maturana, H. R., and Varela, F . J. (1980). Autopoiesis and cognition: The realization 
of the living. Dordrecht: Dreidel Pub. Co.
McEwen, B. S. (1998). Stress, adaptation, and disease. Allostasis and allostatic load. 
Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 840, 33–44. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1998.tb09546.x
Mesulam, M. M., and Mufson, E. J. (1982). Insula of the old world monkey. III: efferent 
cortical output and comments on function. J. Comp. Neurol. 212, 38–52. doi: 10.1002/
cne.902120104
Milkowska, K., Galbarczyk, A., and Jasienska, G. (2019). Disgust sensitivity in relation 
to menstrual cycle phase in women with and without an infection. Am. J. Hum. Biol. 
31:e23233. doi: 10.1002/ajhb.23233
Miłkowska, K., Galbarczyk, A., Klimek, M., Zabłocka-Słowińska, K., and Jasienska, G. 
(2021). Pathogen disgust, but not moral disgust, changes across the menstrual cycle. Evol. 
Hum. Behav. 42, 402–408. doi: 10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2021.03.002
Miller, W . I. (1997). The anatomy of disgust. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Miyaura, H., and Iwata, M. (2002). Direct and indirect inhibition of Th1 development 
by progesterone and glucocorticoids. J. Immunol. 168, 1087–1094. doi: 10.4049/
jimmunol.168.3.1087
Moll, J., de Oliveira-Souza, R., Moll, F . T., Ignácio, F . A., Bramati, I. E., Caparelli-Dáquer, E. M., 
et al. (2005). The moral affiliations of disgust: a functional MRI study. Cogn. Behav. Neurol. 
18, 68–78. doi: 10.1097/01.wnn.0000152236.46475.a7
Tolchinsky et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1454774
Frontiers in Psychology 13 frontiersin.org
Morgan, J. T., and Amaral, D. G. (2013). Comparative analysis of the dendritic 
organization of principal neurons in the lateral and central nuclei of the rhesus macaque 
and rat amygdala. Journal of Comparative Neurology , 522, 689–176. doi: 10.1002/
cne.23467
Olatunji, B. O., Armstrong, T., and Elwood, L. (2017). Is disgust proneness associated 
with anxiety and related disorders? A qualitative review and meta-analysis of group 
comparison and correlational studies. Perspect. Psychol. Sci.  12, 613–648. doi: 
10.1177/1745691616688879
Olatunji, B. O., Cox, R. C., and Li, I. (2020). Disgust regulation between menstrual 
cycle phases: differential effects of emotional suppression and reappraisal. J. Behav. Ther. 
Exp. Psychiatry 68:101543. doi: 10.1016/j.jbtep.2019.101543
Panksepp, J. (1982). Toward a general psychobiological theory of emotions. Behavioral 
and Brain Sciences, 5, 407–422. doi: 10.1017/s0140525x00012759
Panksepp, J. (1998). Affective neuroscience: The foundations of human and animal 
emotions. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Panksepp, J. (2007). Criteria for basic emotions: is DISGUST a primary “emotion”? 
Cognit. Emot. 21, 1819–1828. doi: 10.1080/02699930701334302
Panksepp, J., and Biven, L. (2012). The archaeology of mind: neural origins of human 
emotion. New Y ork, NY: WW Norton and Company.
Parr, T., Pezzulo, G., and Friston, K. J. (2022). Active inference: the free energy 
principle in mind, brain, and behavior. London: MIT Press.
Phillips, M. L., Senior, C., Fahy, T., and David, A. S. (1998). Disgust–the forgotten 
emotion of psychiatry. Br. J. Psychiatry 172, 373–375. doi: 10.1192/bjp.172.5.373
Polák, J., Rádlová, S., Janovcová, M., Flegr, J., Landová, E., and Frynta, D. (2020). Scary 
and nasty beasts: self-reported fear and disgust of common phobic animals. Br. J. 
Psychol. 111, 297–321. doi: 10.1111/bjop.12409
Pujol, J., Blanco-Hinojo, L., Coronas, R., Esteba-Castillo, S., Rigla, M., 
Martínez-Vilavella, G., et al. (2018). Mapping the sequence of brain events in response 
to disgusting food. Hum. Brain Mapp. 39, 369–380. doi: 10.1002/hbm.23848
Rolls, E. T. (1989). Information processing in the taste system of primates. J. Exp. Biol. 
146, 141–164. doi: 10.1242/jeb.146.1.141
Rozin, P ., and Fallon, A. E. (1987). A perspective on disgust. Psychol. Rev. 94, 23–41. 
doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.94.1.23
Sarolidou, G., Axelsson, J., Kimball, B. A., Sundelin, T., Regenbogen, C., 
Lundström, J. N., et al. (2020). People expressing olfactory and visual cues of disease are 
less liked. Philos. Trans. Royal Soc. B Biol. Sci. 375:20190272. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2019.0272
Sasson, Y ., Dekel, S., Nacasch, N., Chopra, M., Zinger, Y ., Amital, D., et al. (2005). 
Posttraumatic obsessive–compulsive disorder: a case series. Psychiatry Res.  135, 
145–152. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2004.05.026
Schaller, M., and Duncan, L. A. (2007). “The behavioral immune system: its evolution 
and social psychological implications” in Evolution and the social mind: Evolutionary 
psychology and social cognitions. eds. J. P . Forgas, M. G. Haselton and W . Von Hippel 
(London: Routledge), 293–307.
Schulkin, J., and Sterling, P . (2019). Allostasis: a brain-centered, predictive mode of 
physiological regulation. Trends Neurosci. 42, 740–752. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2019.07.010
Schumacher, A., Heinze, K., Witte, J., Poloski, E., Linzke, N., Woidacki, K., et al. 
(2013). Human chorionic gonadotropin as a central regulator of pregnancy immune 
tolerance. J. Immunol. 190, 2650–2658. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202698
Siviy, S. M., and Panksepp, J. (1985). Dorsomedial diencephalic involvement in the 
juvenile play of rats. Behav. Neurosci. 99, 1103–1113. doi: 10.1037//0735-7044.99.6.1103
Solms, M. (2018a). The scientific standing of psychoanalysis. BJPsych Int. 15, 5–8. doi: 
10.1192/bji.2017.4
Solms, M. (2018b). The neurobiological underpinnings of psychoanalytic theory and 
therapy. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 12:294. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2018.00294
Solms, M. (2021). Revision of drive theory. J. Am. Psychoanal. Assoc. 69, 1033–1091. 
doi: 10.1177/00030651211057041
Solms, M., and Turnbull, O. (2018). The brain and the inner world: an introduction 
to the neuroscience of subjective experience. London: Routledge.
Sprengelmeyer, R., Y oung, A. W ., Calder, A. J., Karnat, A., Lange, H., Hömberg, V ., 
et al. (1996). Loss of disgust. Brain 119, 1647–1665. doi: 10.1093/brain/119.5.1647
Sprengelmeyer, R., Y oung, A. W ., Mahn, K., Schroeder, U., Woitalla, D., Büttner, T., et al. 
(2003). Facial expression recognition in people with medicated and unmedicated Parkinson’s 
disease. Neuropsychologia 41, 1047–1057. doi: 10.1016/s0028-3932(02)00295-6
Sprengelmeyer, R., Y oung, A. W ., Pundt, I., Sprengelmeyer, A., Calder, A. J., 
Berrios, G., et al. (1997). Disgust implicated in obsessive–compulsive disorder. Proc. 
Royal Soc. Series B: Biol. Sci. 264, 1767–1773. doi: 10.1098/rspb.1997.0245
Steiner, J. E., Glaser, D., Hawilo, M. E., and Berridge, K. C. (2001). Comparative 
expression of hedonic impact: affective reactions to taste by human infants and other 
primates. Neuroscience and amp. Biobehav. Rev.  25, 53–74. doi: 10.1016/
s0149-7634(00)00051-8
Stern, J., and Shiramizu, V . (2022). Hormones, ovulatory cycle phase and pathogen 
disgust: a longitudinal investigation of the compensatory prophylaxis hypothesis. Horm. 
Behav. 138:105103. doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2021.105103
Stevenson, R. J., Case, T. I., and Oaten, M. J. (2009). Frequency and recency of 
infection and their relationship with disgust and contamination sensitivity. Evol. Hum. 
Behav. 30, 363–368. doi: 10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2009.02.005
Straube, T., Weisbrod, A., Schmidt, S., Raschdorf, C., Preul, C., Mentzel, H.-J., et al. 
(2010). No impairment of recognition and experience of disgust in a patient with a 
right-hemispheric lesion of the insula and basal ganglia. Neuropsychologia 48, 
1735–1741. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2010.02.022
Thorpe, S. J., Patel, S. P ., and Simonds, L. M. (2003). The relationship between disgust 
sensitivity, anxiety and obsessions. Behav. Res. Ther.  41, 1397–1409. doi: 10.1016/
S0005-7967(03)00058-5
Timmers, A. D., Bossio, J. A., and Chivers, M. L. (2018). Disgust, sexual cues, and the 
prophylaxis hypothesis. Evol. Psychol. Sci. 4:179, –190. doi: 10.1007/s40806-017-0127-3
Toronchuk, J. A., and Ellis, G. F . (2007a). Disgust: sensory affect or primary emotional 
system? Cognit. Emot. 21, 1799–1818. doi: 10.1080/02699930701298515
Toronchuk, J. A., and Ellis, G. F . (2007b). Criteria for basic emotions: seeking 
DISGUST? Cognit. Emot. 21, 1829–1832. doi: 10.1080/02699930701334419
Tuerke, K. J., Limebeer, C. L., Fletcher, P . J., and Parker, L. A. (2012). Double 
dissociation between regulation of conditioned disgust and taste avoidance by serotonin 
availability at the 5-HT3Receptor in the posterior and anterior insular cortex. J. Neurosci. 
32, 13709–13717. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.2042-12.2012
Tybur, J. M., Lieberman, D., and Griskevicius, V . (2009). Microbes, mating, and 
morality: individual differences in three functional domains of disgust. J. Pers. Soc. 
Psychol. 97, 103–122. Scopus. doi: 10.1037/a0015474
Valderrama, J., Hansen, S. K., Pato, C., Phillips, K., Knowles, J., and Pato, M. T. (2020). 
Greater history of traumatic event exposure and PTSD associated with comorbid body 
dysmorphic disorder in a large OCD cohort. Psychiatry Res. 289:112962. doi: 10.1016/j.
psychres.2020.112962
Van Overveld, M., de Jong, P . J., Peters, M. L., van Hout, W . J., and Bouman, T. K. 
(2008). An internet-based study on the relation between disgust sensitivity and 
emetophobia. J. Anxiety Disord. 22, 524–531. doi: 10.1016/j.janxdis.2007.04.001
Varela, F . G., Maturana, H. R., and Uribe, R. (1974). Autopoiesis: the organization of 
living systems, its characterization and a model. Curr. Mod. Biol.  5, 187–196. doi: 
10.1016/0303-2647(74)90031-8
Xie, Z., Zhang, X., Zhao, M., Huo, L., Huang, M., Li, D., et al. (2022). The gut-to-brain 
axis for toxin-induced defensive responses. Cell 185, 4298–4316. doi: 10.1016/j.
cell.2022.10.001
Želaźniewicz, A., Borkowska, B., Nowak, J., and Pawłowski, B. (2016). The 
progesterone level, leukocyte count and disgust sensitivity across the menstrual cycle. 
Physiol. Behav. 161, 60–65. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2016.04.002
Żelaźniewicz, A., and Pawłowski, B. (2015). Disgust in pregnancy and fetus sex—
longitudinal study. Physiol. Behav. 139, 177–181. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2014.11.032
Zhong, W ., Shahbaz, O., Teskey, G., Beever, A., Kachour, N., Venketaraman, V ., et al. (2021). 
Mechanisms of nausea and vomiting: current knowledge and recent advances in intracellular 
emetic signaling systems. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 22:5797. doi: 10.3390/ijms22115797