Academic Editor: David Papo
Received: 20 June 2025
Revised: 16 July 2025
Accepted: 21 July 2025
Published: 4 August 2025
Citation: Tucker, D.M.; Luu, P .;
Friston, K.J. The Criticality of
Consciousness: Excitatory–Inhibitory
Balance and Dual Memory Systems in
Active Inference. Entropy 2025, 27, 829.
https://doi.org/10.3390/e27080829
Copyright: © 2025 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).
Article
The Criticality of Consciousness: Excitatory–Inhibitory Balance
and Dual Memory Systems in Active Inference
Don M. T ucker1,2, *, Phan Luu 1,2 and Karl J. Friston 3,4
1 Brain Electrophysiology Laboratory Company, 440 E. Broadway, Suite 200, Eugene, OR 97401, USA;
phan.luu@bel.company
2 Department of Psychology, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA
3 Department of Imaging Neuroscience, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, London WC1N 3AR, UK;
k.friston@ucl.ac.uk
4 VERSES AI Research Lab, Los Angeles, CA 90016, USA
* Correspondence: don.tucker@bel.company
Abstract
The organization of consciousness is described through increasingly rich theoretical models.
We review evidence that working memory capacity—essential to generating consciousness in
the cerebral cortex—is supported by dual limbic memory systems. These dorsal (Papez) and
ventral (Yakovlev) limbic networks provide the basis for mnemonic processing and prediction
in the dorsal and ventral divisions of the human neocortex. Empirical evidence suggests
that the dorsal limbic division is (i) regulated preferentially by excitatoryfeedforwardcontrol,
(ii) consolidated by REM sleep, and (iii) controlled in waking by phasic arousal through
lemnothalamic projections from the pontine brainstem reticular activating system. The ven-
tral limbic division and striatum, (i) organizes the inhibitory neurophysiology of NREM to
(ii) consolidate explicit memory in sleep, (iii) operating in waking cognition under the same
inhibitory feedback control supported by collothalamic tonic activation from the midbrain.
We propose that (i) these dual (excitatory and inhibitory) systems alternate in the stages of
sleep, and (ii) in waking they must be balanced—at criticality—to optimize the active inference
that generates conscious experiences. Optimal Bayesian belief updating rests on balanced
feedforward (excitatory predictive) and feedback (inhibitory corrective) control biases that
play the role of prior and likelihood (i.e., sensory) precision. Because the excitatory (E) phasic
arousal and inhibitory (I) tonic activation systems that regulate these dual limbic divisions
have distinct affective properties, varying levels of elation for phasic arousal (E) and anxiety
for tonic activation (I), the dual control systems regulate sleep and consciousness in ways
that are adaptively balanced—around the entropic nadir ofE–I criticality—for optimal self-
regulation of consciousness and psychological health. Because they are emotive as well as
motive control systems, these dual systems have unique qualities of feeling that may be
registered as subjective experience.
Keywords: excitatory; inhibitory; consciousness; active inference; criticality
1. Introduction and Overview
Progress in the understanding of neural dynamics is allowing new integrative theories
for how conscious experience might arise in the distributed operations of the cerebral cortex.
A key theme is the role of prediction and working memory, such that consciousness serves
as an integrator of working memory in ongoing cognition [ 1]. Considering the neural
networks that could support the integrative function of widespread cortical networks,
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 https://doi.org/10.3390/e27080829
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 2 of 42
global neuronal workspace (GNW) theory [2] suggests how the synchronization or ignition
of coherence within widespread frontal and parietal networks could facilitate this coherent,
integrative processing.
In addition to grounding the study of consciousness in the properties of distributed
processing in neural networks, other approaches have considered the subjective properties
of conscious experience that must be explained by a scientific theory. Reasoning that it is
the information itself that must support the properties that are required for consciousness,
integrated information theory (IIT) has identified consciousness with the notion of inte-
grated information [3]. Although this “integrated information” is a formal notion, we can
see the relevance to the holistic grasp of the meaning of a situation that consciousness must
be able to provide.
The theoretical scope and thus distance from specific empirical tests necessary for
ITT’s abstract characterization of brain function appears to be challenging for many in
neuroscience who are more familiar with objective hypotheses and closely defined experi-
mental tests. A group of neuroscientists and allied academics have recently petitioned to
have IIT declared as unfalsifiable and thus unscientific [ 4,5]. Although this seems to be
a somewhat dramatic gesture, one can perhaps understand that falsification may appear
particularly difficult to those considering a model like IIT, where what is to be explained
are qualities of consciousness defined by subjective experience [6].
1.1. Subjective Experience as Evidence for a Theory of Consciousness
The issue in this controversy seems to be whether IIT, accepting as it does the qualities
of subjective experience as important evidence of consciousness, can be considered as
scientific inquiry. Before behaviorism, the teaching of psychology, such as by William
James [7] instructed students to engage in careful reflection on subjective experience. James
observed that his own conscious reflections were transient, occupying a period of about
15 s before moving on to a new focus. He described his experience as if it were a bird,
moving from these perchings of consciousness with flightings to new topics. He also used
the metaphor of a stream of consciousness, and remarked that it often included subjective
feelings of personal value, with some ideas experienced as furtherances, moving in the right
direction, and others as hindrances, holding him back.
For many modern neuroscientists and cognitive scientists, and the students they teach,
these observations about conscious experience have been relegated to the subjective domain,
and thus not allowed as objective scientific evidence. This may be logically problematic,
given that the topic to be explained is itself a subjective phenomenon.
1.2. The Privileged Subjectivity of Qualia
The difficulty of reconciling subjective and objective forms of evidence arises in a dif-
ferent form for certain philosophers who hold that consciousness is ultimately a subjective
phenomenon, a “hard problem,” that cannot be reduced to a mechanistic account of neural
mechanisms [8]. In this position, accepted as authoritative by a number of neuroscientists,
Chalmers emphasizes that his experience of fundamental qualia of perception, such as the
sound of middle C on the piano, are subjective properties that are not in a form that could
even in theory be reduced to neural mechanisms.
Furthermore, assuming that science cannot explain subjective experience, Nagel
claimed that is vapid scientism to assume that all meaningful facets of life can be ex-
plained by science, whether through the principles of physics or those of evolutionary
biology [9]. In his famous question, “What is it like to be a bat?” Nagel argued that no
amount of objective study can tell us the answer, because the bat’s subjectivity is funda-
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 3 of 42
mentally unapproachable by human experience, with no insight possible from scientific
inquiry [10].
1.3. The Feeling of Consciousness
By these accounts, scientific objectivity and personal subjectivity are irreconcilable.
At the same time, some recent scientific theories of consciousness seem to have confused
the picture further by proposing that the objective basis for conscious experience may be
found in subjective feelings. These theories propose a causal status to subjective feelings
for generating consciousness. From his extensive study of clinical disorders, Damasio
famously described consciousness as the feeling of what happens [11]. In his analysis of the
levels of experience supported by brain systems, Damasio argues that feeling provides
the foundation for experience, perhaps consistent with the classical notion that the core of
consciousness is sentience.
Solms drew upon the evidence that subcortical structures, integrated at the level of
the midbrain [12], form a sufficient basis for basic consciousness, with the cerebral cortex
playing a secondary role [ 13]. Solms describes both the essential role of the midbrain
in regulating alertness and arousal, and he provides compelling case studies of cortical
agenesis in children whose social comportment, while limited, manifests many of the
features we would assume require intact consciousness.
An equally explicit anatomical analysis—implying that feelings must be the basis for
consciousness—has been asserted by Chanes and Barrett, who proposed that consciousness
emerges from the global integration of access for neocortical function by the motivationally
charged limbic system [14,15].
1.4. Computing Experience
Recent information theoretic accounts of cognitive processing have considered Bayesian
computation [16–19] that can be aligned directly with the brain’s distributed processing [20,21].
The description of cognition as active inference [22–24] has provided a formalism for how
the organism’s existing knowledge (i.e., Bayesian priors) provides a (generative) model
for effective predictions of environmental states from observable data (sensations) that are
assimilated via a neuronally instantiated Bayesian belief updating process.
In a way that aligns well with Helmholtz’s notion ofunconscious inference in perception,
Bastos and associates have detailed how active inference can be related to hierarchical pre-
dictive coding in the visual system (drawing on prior perceptual experience, as Helmholtz
proposed), with specific roles for both predictions arising from higher cortical areas and
error-correction imposed by the constraint of fitting sensory input [ 25]. Using the same
framework—in a way that suggests a novel interpretation of motor control—Adams and
colleagues have formulated active inference as the realization of prior intentions, where
predictions of the consequences of actions guide lower motor processing through providing
predictions [26].
As computational models, these formulations of active inference entail specific and
testable theories for their neural implementations, including analysis of the computational
basis for consciousness [27]. Furthermore, the very structure of the organism’s information
processing, mediating between the intrinsic domain of information that generates affor-
dance predictions and the extrinsic domain that self-corrects in light of environmental data,
describes a basis from which consciousness is likely to emerge [ 28]. With the Bayesian
formulation of inference—built on the organism’s self-organization, in relation to sensory
evidence—consciousness becomes closely aligned not only with implicit self-evidencing,
but explicit self-awareness [29], qualities that are clearly relevant to subjective experience.
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 4 of 42
At the same time, even a general neurocomputational model of cognition seems a far
cry from the notion that consciousness arises from the feeling of what happens. As we
will see in this paper, however, as we align active inference with the neurophysiology of
corticolimbic mechanisms, it becomes necessary to include the controls on limbic activity
from the subcortical arousal and activation systems. These turn out to be well-placed to
regulate the feelings of conscious experience, as described by Solms [13].
1.5. Regulating Synaptic Connectivity, and Consciousness, with Our Feelings
In this paper, we attempt to extend the accounts of Damasio, Solms, and Chanes and
Barrett by arguing that consciousness emerges in the process of active inference through
adaptive controls (feelings). We argue that these feelings are emergent from the brain’s arousal
and activation systems, based in the limbic and subcortical networks that regulate memory
and inference (prediction and error-correction) in the cerebral cortex [30–32]. In fact, the dual
limbic memory systems have motivational features of feedforward and feedback control that
may explain the specific control of prediction and correction, respectively.
The neurocomputational mechanisms of active inference are fundamentally implicit,
consistent with Helmholtz’s original insight. In fact, we will see the fundamental inhibitory
nature of error correction and the excitatory nature of generating predictions as we examine
the consolidation of the dual forms of memory in NREM and REM sleep, respectively. So,
how could such implicit, unconscious processes give rise to feelings?
Building on the inhibitory and excitatory neurophysiological mechanisms of memory
consolidation in sleep stages [33], we will propose the criticality hypothesis of consciousness.
This hypothesis suggests that the opponent complementarity of the excitatory (REM-like)
and the inhibitory (NREM-like) systems generate consciousness when simultaneously
active in waking and balanced at excitatory–inhibitory criticality. To support this proposal,
we will outline a control theoretic formulation for regulating conscious processing, where
the primary controls are affective biases on the predictive priors and the corrective feedback
of active inference (the excitatory and inhibitory feelings of elation and anxiety). Tech-
nically, these variables play the role of gain control that can be read as an encoding of
confidence or precision; equipping active inference with ‘mental actions’ and a putative
phenomenology [34–40].
We will argue that the mechanisms of active inference can then explain key qualities of
consciousness: the subjective sense of what happens next (excitatory prediction) balanced
against the objective experience of what just happened (inhibitory correction). These dual
aspects of active inference are each motivated by ‘feelings.’ Indeed, the experience of neural
excitation is predictable: we experience it as degrees of elation, a cardinal dimension of
subjective affect [41]. There is psychological evidence that the excitation of prediction and
thus the experience of the future are engaged by at least moderate degrees of elation [42].
Similarly, the sensitivity to error-correction and self-restraint are associated with the second
cardinal dimension of emotion; namely, anxiety and/or hostility [ 41]. The inhibition
integral to the neural mediation of anxiety is a second (i.e., complementary) affective
control system essential for sense-making under uncertainty [42].
Thus, the phasic arousal (depression to elation) and tonic activation (security to
anxiety) systems can be recognized in subjective experience by their emotional qualities,
their valenced affects. We hypothesize that these excitatory and inhibitory feelings create
the ‘grip’ on information we experience as consciousness, when they are balanced.
However, a constant state of balance is not adaptive; we need to be more elated
sometimes, to be flexibly creative, and more anxious at other times, to be cautiously
critical. Adaptive awareness then allows contextual active inference when the excitatory
and inhibitory feelings are engaged in varying degrees. The result of the feeling of what
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 5 of 42
happens [11] is then a subjective explanation for experience [43]. The requisite variations
are affectively charged periods of relative excitation or inhibition, generating feelings
(phasic arousal of elation and/or tonic activation of anxiety) that then align directly with
William James’s experiences of furtherance and hindrances [ 7]. Crucially, for adaptive
variations around these opponent processes, they need to be balanced in a critical regime.
This is the basis of the criticality hypothesis pursued below.
1.6. Unconscious Self-Organization in Sleep
In addition to the optimization of (Bayesian) belief updating by variations in excitatory
(predictive and constructive) and inhibitory (revisionary and critical) processing during
waking, the day’s lessons and opportunities for active inference continue through major
excursions from criticality in sleep [33]. Here the excitatory and inhibitory operations of
‘affective inference’ are manifest in their fundamentally distinct forms. We describe this
as affective inference because the controls are motivational systems for regulating active
inference in (subsequent) perception and behavior.
In waking, we make predictions about what’s happening, and then we correct these
predictions on the basis of what happened [ 44]. In sleep, first we correct our earlier
predictions with the inhibitory control of NREM sleep. The salient unpredicted events
of the day seem to be held in a kind of limbic resonance, and—with the onset of NREM
sleep—these events are replayed for refining the generations of predictions through the
inhibitory neurophysiology of Non-REM (NREM) sleep. Following each NREM episode,
Rapid Eye Movement (REM) sleep then breaks criticality, through excessive excitement that
optimizes and reconsolidates the organism’s Bayesian priors to optimize the generative
capacity (i.e., generalization) for prediction in the next day’s active inference [33].
These dual organizational mechanisms of sleep—that recapitulate neurodevelopmen-
tal self-organization [45]—are then linked to waking experience by controls engaged by the
ongoing excitatory and inhibitory processes of active inference in conscious waking. In this
way, the alternating nighttime excursions from criticality organize the brain’s generative
model (with inhibitory feedback during NREM and excitatory feedforward exercise in
REM) to restore synaptic homeostasis, and ensure criticality to support the next day’s
waking consciousness [46].
1.7. Affective Control of Criticality
Considering both the minor excitatory–inhibitory (E–I) excursions of adaptive waking,
and the major excursions of sleeping, the criticality hypothesis of consciousness proposes
that active inference can explain the essential feelings of subjective experience. We self-
organize to a critical regime of belief updating through the E–I balance that underwrites
our feelings. Consciousness ignites as an enduring memory (extended current awareness)
when the global neuronal workspace can be accessed at criticality.
After reviewing the key empirical evidence and rehearsing the principles of variational
inference and accompanying criticality, we conclude by considering experimental predic-
tions, phenomenological implications, and the properties of neurophysiological excitement
and inhibition that we recognize as conscious experience. In the next section, we summarize
key terms.
2. Key Terms
The primary concepts for this theoretical approach are described in Table 1.
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 6 of 42
Table 1. Key Terms.
Term/Symbol Concise Definition
Typical
Biological/Computational
Correlate
Feed-forward (limbifugal,
generative) projections
Propagation of descending
predictions from higher to
lower cortical levels; sets
up hypotheses about
upcoming input.
Cortico-cortical projections
from infragranular to
supragranular layers;
hippocampal →
neocortical replay; θ–γ
“driver” coupling.
Feedback (limbipetal,
corrective) projections
Error-correcting signals
that compare predictions
with sensory input and
update beliefs via
ascending
prediction errors.
Cortico-cortical projections
layer 2–3 → 4;
thalamo-cortical bursting;
α–β “modulator” rhythms.
Excitatory/Inhibitory (E–I)
balance
Dynamic trade-off between
excitatory drive and
inhibitory restraint that
keeps networks
near criticality.
Pyramidal–interneuron
loops; spike-time
cross-correlations; LC-NE
vs. VTA-DA
neuromodulation.
Criticality
An operating regime
poised at the transition
between order and
disorder, maximizing
dynamic range and
information flow.
Power-law avalanche size
distributions in
hdEEG/MEG; 1/f
spectral slope.
Markov blanket
The statistical boundary or
interface that shields
internal states from
external states while
permitting exchange.
Boundaries between each
hierarchical level of the
Structural Model;
thalamo-cortical loops.
Variational Free Energy
Upper bound on surprise
(i.e., self information);
minimized when the
agent’s generative model
matches sensory data.
Evidence-lower-bound
(ELBO) in Bayesian
machine-learning;
precision-weighted
prediction error in
predictive coding and
Bayesian filtering.
NREM (N1–N3)/REM
Alternating sleep
macro-states: NREM
supports synaptic
down-selection and
memory replay; REM
integrates and
contextualizes
mnemonic traces.
Slow oscillations/spindles
(NREM) vs. θ-γ coupling
and PGO-waves (REM).
3. Adaptive Control from the Dorsal and Ventral Limbic Divisions
The underlying mechanisms of consciousness must include working memory. The
role of working memory within current theories of consciousness can be aligned with philo-
sophical accounts of the phenomenology of conscious experience [47]. Working memory
involves both the narrow focus of explicit representations that are readily manipulated,
as well as the more implicit “activated long-term memory” representations that may be
primed for access, if not immediately available in consciousness [48].
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 7 of 42
William James emphasized that—in addition to the narrow focus of consciousness—
there is a wider fringe of consciousness that is an integral resource for ongoing thought [7].
John Dewey proposed that focal consciousness has not only a fringe of not fully aware
experience, but also a field of unconscious but vaguely activated (intuitive) meaning that
informs present experience [ 49]. These classical phenomenological accounts are more
pragmatic than the modern portrayals of subjectively pristine (and therefore mechanistically
irreducible) qualia of conscious experience [8,10] that restrict consciousness to the most
iconic and singular representations of focal, explicit representation. In contrast, a more
pragmatic account may allow a wider range of fringe and field meaning to be allowed
into the penumbra of personal consciousness, where the active, dynamic, and motivated
mechanisms of working memory may be more intuitively appreciated [50]. Understanding
the neural mechanisms of implicit and explicit memory that give rise to these varying states
of consciousness may allow a scientific account of the role of consciousness in a full range
of adaptive behavior, as implemented through motivational and emotional biases that direct
active inference toward goals or away from threats.
3.1. Dual Memory Systems
In considering the dynamic range of activation of associations within working memory
that contribute to consciousness, modern research can draw on computational models of
distributed representations in which information is represented through the strength of
synaptic connections within cerebral networks. Knowing the network architecture of the
mammalian cortex, such as formulated within the Structural Model [51], enables explicit
analysis of how this connectional architecture must support parallel distributed processes,
including differing forms of access to working memory.
Situated at the core of the cerebral hemisphere (Figure 1), the limbic system is densely
interconnected both with subcortical control systems of the hypothalamus and thalamus
(connecting to midbrain and brainstem) as well as the extensive heteromodal cortex adjacent
to the limbic networks, which are interconnected with not only frontal and temporoparietal
networks, but also unimodal association cortices and primary sensory and motor areas as
detailed in the Structural Model. As a result, corticolimbic interactions (and their thalamic
mediation) are central to both ongoing working memory and the consolidation of enduring
long-term memory within the distributed connectivity of the human cortex [52].
The neural activity and cognitive operations of the cerebral hemispheres, in sleeping
and waking, are regulated by the neuromodulator-specific brainstem and midbrain arousal
control systems, together with the forebrain nucleus basalis (Figure 2). These are in turn
regulated in complex patterns by the telencephalic hierarchy of cortical, limbic, striatal, and
thalamic systems.
Both traditional neurology and modern cognitive neuroscience have largely treated
the mnemonic functions of the limbic system as separate from motivational functions, even
though it is clear in the animal literature that mammalian memory is adaptively moti-
vated [53,54]. In the clinical syndromes of cortical lesions, both emotional and mnemonic
functions are typically damaged by limbic lesions. There is a clear picture of the dual
memory systems from amnesias that are common not only with dorsal limbic (particularly
the hippocampal) lesions, but also ventral limbic (insula and amygdala) damage [55,56].
The dorsal limbic system is comprised by the Papez circuit (colored red in Figure 3), regu-
lated by the mammillary body of the hypothalamus and the anterior nucleus of the thalamus,
and engaging the hippocampus, cingulate cortex, and septum [54,57]. Complementing this
division, the ventral limbic Yakovlev circuit includes the amygdala, anterior temporal pole,
and orbital frontal cortex, regulated by the mediodorsal nucleus of the thalamus, including
the unique (one-directional) triangular circuit shown in blue in Figure 3 [58–60].
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 8 of 42
Figure 1. The human brain includes the left (top) and right (bottom) cerebral hemispheres, including
large wrinkled sheets of cortex. The base of the brain is composed of the brainstem rhombencephalic
(myencephalon and metencephelon) and midbrain mesencephalic arousal control systems. At the
inner core of each cerebral hemisphere is the limbic system, interfacing the hemisphere with the
subcortical levels that provide both motivation and arousal controls for the entire brain.
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 9 of 42
Figure 2. The regulation of sleep and consciousness in the human brain is controlled by major neuro-
modulator systems located in the brainstem (serotonin and norepinephrine, midbrain (dopamine)
and basal forebrain (Nucleus Basalis acetylcholine). These are, in turn, regulated by the wake-sleep
state switching and circadian regulators in the hypothalamus, including the orexin/MCH balance for
regulating the daily wake-REM cycle and adenosine for regulating NREM sleep pressure.
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 10 of 42
Figure 3. Dorsal and ventral divisions of the limbic system. Top: Dorsal (Papez) limbic circuit
linking hippocampus with cingulate cortex, septum, and mammillary body of the hypothalamus,
with regulation by the anterior nucleus of the thalamus. This anterior thalamic nucleus receives
lemnothalamic projections from the pontine brainstem.Bottom: Components of the ventral (Yakovlev)
limbic circuit linking the amygdala, anterior temporal pole, and caudal orbital frontal cortex through
the mediodorsal nucleus of the thalamus. The mediodorsal thalamic nucleus receives collothalamic
projections from the midbrain.
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 11 of 42
Closely aligned with the limbic memory functions are the motivational and emotional
biases that are manifested in pathological forms, depending on whether dorsal or ventral
divisions are damaged. Dorsal limbic lesions, such as to cingulate cortex, often result
in pseudodepression, involving a loss of optimistic motive engagement and hope [ 42,61].
Ventral limbic network damage, on the other hand, such as with lesions to anterior temporal
and orbital frontal networks, typically leads to a pseudospsychopathic syndrome, in which
inadequate anxiety leads to poor impulse control and social insensitivity [42,61]. The classic
animal model of ventral limbic damage is the Kluver-Bucy syndrome [62], in which removal
of the anterior temporal lobe, damaging the extended amygdala [63] in monkeys, leads to
hyper-oral and hyper-sexual behavior (releasing the hedonic impetus of the dorsal limbic
division). It also produces what Kluver and Bucy called hypermetamorphosis, a sensitivity
to each change in the environment, reflecting the exaggerated, feedforward orienting to
novelty caused by the dorsal limbic release.
Studying these effects—together with congruent effects of limbic lesions or stimulation
in animal learning [64], as well as the unique dorsal and ventral frontolimbic contributions
to control of motor behavior [ 65]—led Tucker & Luu [42] to propose that dorsal limbic
motive control is associated with the phasic arousal of the excitatory affect of elation,
leading to an impulsive optimism such as is exaggerated in clinical mania. This can be
considered as the excitatory impetus for actualizing organismic affordances. In normal
brain function, this bias is balanced by the ventral limbic mode of constraint and inhibitory
anxiety regulated by the tonic activation system, described as an inhibitory constraint, the
artus, which in humans enhances sensitivity to social feedback for developing self-control
of personal behavior [42].
3.2. Active Inference in the Cerebral Cortex
Bringing these differential limbic motive biases to the evolved architecture of action
regulation in the cerebral cortex, Tucker & Luu [31] proposed that the emotionally positive,
feedforward bias of the dorsal limbic division and the associated dorsal neocortex may
be important to generating predictions and expectancies in the limbifugal (from limbic)
direction in the process of active inference [ 25]. The dorsal division of neocortex has a
minimally developed granular layer [66], suggesting it is less constrained by inhibitory
control than the ventral neocortex, which has a well-developed granular layer 4 with
inhibitory interneurons that are important for error-correction in the limbipetal (toward
limbic) direction of active inference [25].
Figure 4 illustrates how active inference might work in cortical hierarchies in auditory
perception, organizing communication across higher cortical areas (such as heteromodal
cortex) at right, unimodal association cortex (in the middle) and primary auditory cortex at
left [23]. The feedforward expectations for what should be heard (predictions in black) are
passed from higher to lower areas (black state units and black arrows), where the feedback
corrections (prediction error in red) from the sensory data are processed to update the
predictions on the basis of sensory errors. Note that this illustration in Figure 4 uses the
conventional neuroscience assumption of “forward” information flow starting with sensory
input, whereas in control theory terms [ 52] this sensory updating is better described as
feedback control, which is the usage we maintain throughout this paper.
Interpreting active inference as a motivated process, regulated by the limbic base of
the neocortical hierarchy, we can see how the generation of predictions in the limbifugal
direction is motivated by the organismic feedforward bias of motive excitement (degrees
of subjective elation) in the dorsal limbic division [31]. This control by Bayesian priors is
complemented by the error-correction in the limbipetal direction, regulated uniquely by
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 12 of 42
the feedback constraint bias of inhibition (subjectively experienced as degrees of anxiety)
applied by the ventral limbic division [31].
Figure 4. From Friston, Breakspear, & Deco, [23]: Schematic detailing a neuronal architecture that
might encode conditional expectations about the states of a hierarchical model. This shows the
speculative cells of origin of forward driving connections that convey prediction errors from a lower
area to a higher area and the backward connections that construct predictions (Mumford, [16,17]).
These predictions try to explain away prediction errors at lower levels. In this scheme, the sources
of forward and backward connections are superficial and deep pyramidal cells, respectively. The
equations represent a generalized descent on free energy under the hierarchical model described in
the main text. State-units are in black and error-units in red. Here, neuronal populations are deployed
hierarchically within three cortical areas (or macro-columns). Within each area, the cells are shown in
relation to cortical layers: supra-granular (I–III) granular (IV) and infra-granular (V–VI) layers, as
shown in the illustration of a eulaminar section of cortex at right.
3.3. Dorsal Excitatory and Ventral Inhibitory Controls on Attention and Working Memory
In the literature on the functional connectivity of cortical networks [67,68], the dorsal
and ventral attention systems provide opponent biases, reflecting internal or endogenous
control from the dorsal attention network, in contrast to external or exogenous control for
the ventral attention network [69]. Recognizing the limbic control of these major neocortical
networks, there is a close correspondence with the formulation of active inference regulated
by feedforward and feedback biases [30,31] with the generative process of predictions—
based on Bayesian priors—balanced by the corrective regulation of error-correction during
evidence accumulation [70,71]. In this setting, the concept of a Markov blanket describes
the information surface forming the interface between the intrinsic domain (generating
predictions) and the extrinsic domain (mediating sensory feedback from the world).
Figure 5 provides a schematic to illustrate how limbic control might be integrated
with Bayesian belief updating. Several sensory and motor pathways of the human brain
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 13 of 42
are unfolded at left, illustrating that the integration of cognition—through interconnected
heteromodal cortex (dashed)—is regulated adaptively by the limbic base (striped) that
represents the still “higher” area of the cortical hierarchy. At right is the predictive pro-
cessing across the hierarchy of one pathway, reflecting limbifugal (from limbic) flow from
infragranular to supragranular layers in the Structural Model (red), indicating the excitatory
feedforward control proposed by Tucker & Luu [31,42]. The balancing feedback control
from supragranular layers to layer 4—mediating error correction [25]—is shown by blue
arrows, reflecting the constraint on perception imposed by sensory data, a feedback process
that we propose is regulated by the inhibitory motive control of anxiety [31].
Figure 5. Left: Cartoon suggesting how the major sensory and motor pathways of the cortex may be
unfolded (here, 3 dorsal and 3 ventral pathways are shown). Striped = limbic; dashed = heteromodal
association cortex; stippled = unimodal association; shaded = primary sensory or motor. Lines between
pathways reflect the density of cross-pathway connections.Right: T op:a single pathway .Middle: the
input (limbipetal feedback) projections (in blue) in the Structural Model are from supragranular to the
higher area granular layer.Bottom: the output (limbifugal feedforward) projections (in red) proceed
from infragranular (5–6) to supragranular (2–3) layers.
A Markov blanket is then the contact surface between the intrinsic core self and the
extrinsic networks of the cerebral cortex mediating exchange with the world. The predictive
affordances of the intrinsic brain are served up by the pyramidal projections from 5–6 to
the more supragranular layers of the lower (closer to sensory or motor) regions of cortex,
where the extrinsic sensory evidence into layer 4 provides corrective constraints to balance
the contributions of sensory evidence and prior constraints.
Although we can envisage one Markov blanket—in the sense of an intrinsic-extrinsic
boundary—anatomically we can see that there are many facets of the interface, formed
between each of the major levels of corticolimbic organization: limbic, heteromodal, uni-
modal, and primary, where each level is synchronized with the same level of other pathways
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 14 of 42
through lateral connections as shown in Figure 5 at left [72]. Each Markov blanket demar-
cates the levels of experience and memory in the control of the visceral, cognitive, and
sensory-motor process of active inference. Within this architecture, one can appreciate the
specific qualities of excitatory limbifugal and inhibitory limbipetal control, negotiating—at
each level of the corticolimbic hierarchy—the excitatory realizations of internal affordances,
on one hand, with the inhibitory feedback constraints of ongoing contact with the environ-
ment, on the other.
3.4. Formulating Excitatory Phasic Arousal and Inhibitory Tonic Activation in the Vertical
Integration of Working Memory
In this theoretical framework, we are using concepts of excitation and inhibition at
a higher level of abstraction than the depolarizing effects of glutamatergic pyramidal
neurons (excitatory) and GABAergic interneurons (inhibitory). In other words, there are
two kinds of excitation–inhibition balance. The first kind refers to the updating of neuronal
representations through error correction, where (ascending, limbipetal) precision-weighted
prediction errors cancel themselves by updating higher-order representations that generate
(descending limbic) predictions. This kind of excitation–inhibition balance mediates the
first-order inference about the content of representations. However, we are concerned with
the second-order inference about the context in which the first-order representations are
updated. This context corresponds to the precision or confidence afforded prior beliefs,
relative to sensory evidence. It is in this sense that the (motive) control of precision has to be
balanced; otherwise, sensory evidence would overwhelm prior predictions; or vice versa.
The question is whether the properties ofE–I criticality apply at this contextual, second-
order level of self-regulating cognition (c.f., metacognition) in the brain. If so, (meta) cognition
could be defined in terms of criticality . The theoretical basis of this view can be seen in
the distinct motive (i.e., precision) controls that are proposed to underly the mnemonic
capacities of the dorsal (Papez) division and ventral (Yakovlev) division of the limbic system.
The proposal is that the dorsal division operates under a feedforward, impulsive form of
control, thereby exerting anexcitatory influence on prior predictions [30,31,42]. In tracing
the dorsal limbic circuits, including the regulation provided by the anterior nucleus of the
thalamus, there are important bidirectional modulatory influences—between the dorsal limbic
division and the lemnothalamic pathways—on the phasic arousal mediated by the pontine
brainstem [30]. Particularly important to this excitatory , motive-memory system is locus
coeruleus norepinephrine (LC NE) modulation (through the dorsal NE bundle) that applies
a habituation bias as an integral component of phasic arousal [ 73]. Integrating this NE
habituation bias with the widespread excitatory tuning of the forebrain nucleus basalis
cholinergic (NB ACh) projection system [74], the functioning of the dorsal limbic division—
and the associated dorsal neocortex—isexcited, reflecting increased activity in the limbifugal
pyramidal pathway generating predictions [31].
Importantly, the NE habituation bias keeps excitation from running out of control. The
net effect is then an impulsive form of control; rapidly generated yet quickly habituated.
See [42] for empirical evidence on functioning of the dorsal corticolimbic networks.
In a similar but opposite fashion, the inhibitory process of the ventral corticolimbic
division is not limited to GABAergic inhibition (which is indeed a key element of the
expanded granular layer in ventral neocortex). Rather, it is a modulatory, inhibitory
function applied to limbic, striatal, and cortical activity that is sustained. It is sustained by
dopaminergic (D4, D2) control from the ventral tegmental area of the midbrain, mediated
through collothalamic pathways, targeting the ventral limbic, striatal, and cortical areas in
particular. The DA regulation, described as tonic activation and also engaging NB ACh,
leads to a sustained and active form of inhibitory control, causing representations to be
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 15 of 42
focused and restricted (c.f., representational sharpening) even when input is maintained at
a high level.
With this specific form of modulation, greater inhibition does not just shut down neural
activity; rather it sustains it in time [73]. The net effect is what Pribram and McGuinness [75]
described as the redundancy bias of tonic activation. There are, therefore, combined effects of
reduced prior precision, and enhanced sensory precision and persistence, that we describe
as the cognitive effects of anxiety.
Thus, the regulation of neural activity by phasic arousal and tonic activation can be
read as excitatory and inhibitory forms of control, such that their balance—at criticality—
may be an essential property for optimal neurophysiological and psychological function.
Even though we have emphasized differences in dorsal and ventral biases, it is impor-
tant to recognize that there are descending, predictive (excitatory) influences and ascending
error-correcting (inhibitory) influences in both dorsal and ventral cortical divisions, and
there are important interactions between dorsal and ventral divisions both at the limbic
level [76] and the neocortical level [77]. As a result, our emphasis on the excitatory (impul-
sive) control of the dorsal corticolimbic division, and the inhibitory (constrained) control
of the ventral division, is a relative one. Nonetheless, understanding even this relative
emphasis on excitatory feedforward versus inhibitory feedback control in the complex
human brain may be simplified through appreciating the evolution of this control archi-
tecture from earlier vertebrate forms, where excitation and inhibition were managed by
more elementary, and interpretable, pallial and subpallial neural architectures and their
respective brainstem and midbrain control systems.
3.5. Evolution of Mammalian Self-Regulation Through Weaving Excitatory and
Inhibitory Architectures
Looking to the subcortical controls for the arousal regulation of the limbic divisions
and associated neocortex in mammals, Luu, Tucker, & Friston [33] traced the subcortical
pathways and found that the midbrain tonic activation system and its dopaminergic neuro-
modulator substrate are particularly important to the ventral limbic division, providing the
source of inhibitory constraint—associated with anxiety—for the ventral network. In earlier
ancestors (amphibians and reptiles), the DA-regulated midbrain-collothalamic pathway
targeted the subpallium (basal ganglia) exclusively. In mammals this collothalamic target-
ing includes cortical-pallial as well as subpallial territories. Yet in mammals, we still see the
collothalamic foundations in the inhibitory mechanisms of the striatum operating on the
limbic system and cortex. Whereas the matrix division of the striatum targets the cortex,
the patch (striosome) division has its major projections to the midbrain DA control centers
(substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area) [78]. This means that the midbrain regulatory
influences, mediated by the DA control of tonic activation, exert inhibitory control on
the limbic and neocortical networks of the cerebral hemispheres through collothalamic
projections and striatal control that are closely regulated by ventral limbic activity [79].
A different form of subcortical control comes from the lemnothalamic pathway origi-
nating in the pontine brainstem (bypassing the midbrain) and targeting the dorsal limbic
division, including the locus coeruleus norepinephrine control that is integral to phasic
arousal [30]. This control system generates an excitatory, feedforward form of control, asso-
ciated with elation [30], regulating the dorsal division of the limbic system. As Nauta [79]
pointed out, the hippocampus (the base of the Papez circuit) provides important input to
the nucleus accumbens of the basal ganglia, immediately adjacent to the septum (the other
end of the Papez circuit). The nucleus accumbens is a key subpallial control structure for
approach behavior [80,81].
Thus, the evolution of the mammalian cortex and limbic system speaks to a complex
weave of excitatory, feedforward control (the foundation of the primitive pallium) and
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 16 of 42
inhibitory feedback control (rooted in the subpallial striatum). As we attempt to characterize
the mechanisms of active inference in the mammalian neocortex, both for perception [25]
and for action [26], we need to understand how inhibitory elements from the embryologic
subpallial ganglionic eminence, which migrate into layer 4 of the neocortex in mammals,
are integrated with the foundational excitatory pallial architecture of the mammalian 6-
layered cerebral cortex [30,31]. Fortunately, the challenging complexity of this evolved (and
controversial) anatomy is less daunting when considering the more elementary separation
of excitatory and inhibitory control modes in an evolutionary-developmental analysis of
ancestral vertebrates.
3.6. Excitatory Pallial and Inhibitory Subpallial Origins of the Human Brain
New insights into the evolutionary-developmental basis of mammalian neuroanatomy
are being developed from studying the gene expression database of the Allen Institute [82].
Figure 6 shows that the major divisions of the neural tube, including roof, alar, basal, and
floor plates, terminate at the hypothalamus, at the acroterminal domain. The entire telen-
cephalon is then derived from the alar plate, responsible for the viscerosensory domain of
the neural tube, specifically from the hp1 hypothalamic domain. What are the implications
of this recent (in the time frame of evolution) mutation of genomic instructions that generate
the vertebrate telencephalon from the alar plate?
Figure 6. (Modified from Puelles [82]: Diagram of the prosomeric neuromeric model of Puelles and
Rubenstein. The floor plate (fp; blue) is now defined molecularly and experimentally (it is induced by
the notochord) as ending rostrally at the mamillary body (now understood to be a rostral entity). The
roof plate (rp, yellow) is defined by experimental fate mapping as ending at the anterior commissure
(ac) above the preoptic area (poa/ap). The red axial dash-line, similar to that in B, is the molecularly
defined (Shh and Nkx2.2 markers) alar-basal boundary (a/b), not being referred expressly to a
ventricular sulcus. The rostralmost prosomere is that identified as hp2, and its green-marked rostral
limit extending between floor and roof plates is the acroterminal rostralmost domain of the brain
(AT), where the rostral ends of the parallel floor (fp), basal (bp), alar (ap) and roof (rp) plates lie, and
where the paired lateral walls of the tube (bp, ap) are continuous left to right. The telencephalon is
interpreted as a bilateral dorsal alar evagination from the hypothalamic hp1 prosomere.
The whole telencephalon appears to rest on a viscerosensory alar function. What does
this imply for the continuing neural development of each individual? Perhaps the entire
viscerosensory telencephalon is a kind of feeling-state: an experiential organ for higher
vertebrate functioning. It imbues sense-making with a sentience by extending the basic
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 17 of 42
(interoceptive) affordances of the neural tube grounded in the homeostatic visceral controls
of the hypothalamus (prosomeres h1 and h2).
The hypothalamus is the end of the primordial neural tube. Even as the foundation of
the vertebrate forebrain, the hypothalamus has always been regulated by the lemnothalamic
projections conveying LC NE control (for mammals this is elation) as well as the VTA
dopaminergic D2 collothalamic control (mammalian anxiety).
However, the telencephalon differentiated its sensory and motor capacities. Its initial
organization in tetrapods (amphibians and reptiles) included a near-complete division be-
tween the excitatory pallium (pyramidal, glutamatergic) and the inhibitory sub-pallium [83].
The excitatory–inhibitory division was near-complete because within the pallium there
were some inhibitory interneurons, and within the sub-pallium there were excitatory
cholinergic cells, not unlike interneurons in the pallium.
With these important complexities, we see a remarkable pattern of E–I separation in
the ancestral organization of the telencephalon as shown in Figure 7. In the elaboration of
hp1 to form the telencephalon, the excitatory control of the pallium was fully separated
from the inhibitory control of the sub-pallium (striatum). Each had its own input from
the lower brain that remains integral to the subcortical control of active affordance in
mammals [30]. Simplifying a complex story, we can see how the basis for the excitatory
pallium is formed by the lemnothalamic projections from the pontine brainstem; the basis
for the inhibitory sub-pallium is formed by the collothalamic projections from the midbrain.
Figure 7. Approximate illustration of dorsal pallial (red) and ventral subpallial (blue) regions of
the salamander telencephalon (original from Herrick, 1948), with approximate location of Herrick’s
sections at bottom, and legend for major levels of the neuraxis.
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 18 of 42
Understanding these origins helps to interpret the adaptive evolution of the mam-
malian cortex after the invasion of the pallium by subpallial elements [42,84,85]. Although
the specifics are debated, there was apparently a large embryologic mutation in which
inhibitory interneurons migrated from the ganglionic eminence into the cerebral cortex,
providing additional inhibitory control for layer 4 that was important to the differentiation
of the 6-layered cerebral cortex [42,84,85]. The excitatory and inhibitory relations took on
a new form, that of the cortical columns. These became the integrated processors for the
cerebral cortex of mammals [32].
Thus the evolutionary history of the telencephalon points to the fundamental division
between excitatory pallial and inhibitory subpallial forms of control, and understanding
these origins may help to explain the integration of control systems that underwrite the
excitatory predictive control of the dorsal limbic division, balanced by the inhibitory
corrective control of the ventral limbic division and striatum [30].
Even with the extensive weaving of excitatory and inhibitory controls within the
mammalian cerebral cortex, there is another clear separation of these fundamental forms of
neural control. This is in the differential forms of memory consolidation in the NREM and
REM stages of sleep.
4. Inhibitory and Excitatory Neurophysiology of Memory Consolidation
in Sleep
The memory capacities—that are realized by E and I control of conscious cognition—
may be emergent from the sequential neuromodulatory control of REM and NREM stages
of sleep, respectively. In reviewing these mechanisms, Tucker, Luu, & Friston [33] began
with the remarkable observations suggesting that explicit memory, the ability for declar-
ative recall of specific facts, has been shown to be consolidated in NREM sleep, but not
REM [86–88]. More specifically, the ability to discern causal relations among elements in
certain problem-solving tasks has been shown to improve more under sleep, and partic-
ularly NREM-rich sleep, more than an equivalent period of waking [ 86]. An important
interpretation is that the replay and rumination of events (observed primarily through
neural activity recorded in NREM sleep) may allow this installation of causal associations
via synaptic consolidation [86].
Clearly, each of the five or so cycles of human sleep involve both NREM episodes,
which are the entry point to sleep in the early night, as well as REM bouts, which are brief in
early cycles but increase in later cycles of the night. Yet memory testing has confirmed the
dependence of explicit, declarative memory on NREM—to the point that two of the major
scientific reviews of this literature (focused on experimental evidence) have commented
that it is difficult to understand the purpose of REM.
Evidence speaks to the importance of REM for emotional memory, and emotional
adjustment [87–89]. Furthermore, several findings suggest the importance of REM to
implicit memory, including the ability to understand the background context that often
allows solutions to insight problems [ 86,87,89]. Once we formulate the mechanisms of
excitatory as well as inhibitory consolidation of synaptic organization in memory, it should
become clear that REM is as integral as NREM to adaptive self-organization of the synaptic
connectional architecture.
4.1. Inhibitory Specification and Error-Correction in Explicit Memory
In reviewing the neurophysiological evidence on memory consolidation in sleep,
Tucker, Luu, and Friston [33] proposed that the dorsal and ventral limbic divisions are
consolidated in REM and NREM stages of sleep, respectively. The excitatory feedforward
regulation of the dorsal limbic division, under control from the pontine reticular activating
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 19 of 42
system and its lemnothalamic projections, supports the generation of predictions in the
limbifugal direction (from limbic toward neocortical areas in the Structural Model). This ex-
citatory, feedforward (top-down) control process appears to be consolidated in the excitatory
(cholinergic) neurophysiological regulation of cerebral networks in REM sleep.
Similarly, the inhibitory feedback (bottom up) regulation of the ventral limbic division
supports the error-correction required for unpredicted events in the limbipetal direction of
predictive processing, which appears to be consolidated in the inhibitory (largely GABAer-
gic) mechanisms of NREM sleep.
With these separate mechanisms, sleep consolidates predictive processing in reverse.
The entry point to normal sleep is invariably NREM, which consolidates the accumulated
errors (unpredicted events) experienced during waking. The neurophysiology for this
encoding of explicit memory for unpredicted events is largely inhibitory. The replay of
significant experienced events is engaged through claustrum suppression of excitability in
the hippocampus, generating sharp wave ripples that index the unpredicted events [90].
These sharp waves are grouped and encoded by sleep spindles regulated by the GABAer-
gic (inhibitory) control from the Thalamic Reticular Nucleus (TRN). Coordination of the
spindle encoding—and protection from further plasticity—is organized by the widespread
inhibitory control from Slow Oscillations (SO), regulated by projections from the claus-
trum [91]. Tucker et al. [33] proposed that the inhibitory delineation of unpredicted salient
events—through these mechanisms—is the basis for consolidating explicit memory; in
ways that allow the feedback (error-correction) phase of predictive processing to incorpo-
rate unpredicted events within the organism’s (generative) model of the world. NREM
sleep is thus not just an encoding of memory, but a continuation of active inference.
Note that the dominance of inhibitory control in NREM sleep has the straightforward
effect of renormalizing neuronal activity, thereby providing a mechanism for synaptic
homeostasis [88,92]. Instead of a generic normalization, however, NREM memory con-
solidation first engages inhibitory mechanisms to select and delineate recent salient (i.e.,
unpredictable) events—including their causal relations—so they are retained and stabilized
by the subsequent global synaptic normalization of the widespread SOs.
4.2. Excitatory Reconsolidation of the Bayesian Predictions of Implicit Memory
As important as it is to delineate and consolidate unpredicted events, the implication
is that new information will disrupt representations of prior memory, due to the inherent
stability-plasticity dilemma of distributed memory systems [93]. Tucker et al. [33] propose
that the subsequent process of REM sleep serves to reorganize, and thus reconsolidate,
existing organismic memory (that underwrite Bayesian priors) in light of the new NREM
encoding of unpredicted events.
The neurophysiology of REM sleep includes widespread cholinergic excitatory mod-
ulation of the cerebral networks, including both the pedunculopontine modulation of
thalamocortical regulation of cortical excitability (a primary source of the “paradoxical”
EEG activation) and the widespread forebrain NB ACh control (Figure 2). Several lines of
evidence point to the excitatory control being attributable to the lemnothalamic regulation
of the dorsal limbic system particularly. This evidence includes the activation of immediate
early genes in the dorsal limbic division following the intense REM rebound after REM
deprivation [94]. Other key evidence is the regulation of the theta oscillations of REM by
multiple levels of the pontine lemnothalamic pathway [95,96].
How can we understand the reorganization of existing memory by widespread exci-
tatory activation in REM? Tucker et al. drew on modeling by Hinton and associates with
a sleep–wake algorithm [97]. When a connectionist simulation is allowed to “run free,”
without the constraint to fit the predictions to sensory input, the effect is to reorganize
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 20 of 42
the existing connection (prediction) weights in a more efficient form. This is particularly
effective when the excitatory exercise is constrained to maintain minimal complexity or
description length, and thus to minimize variational free energy. The result is agist recon-
struction of the internal prediction weights, an efficient (and schematic) reorganization of
the Bayesian priors for the system’s generalization to new events on reawakening.
4.3. The Unconscious Sources of Waking Consciousness
Considering the integral role of sleep consolidation in the adaptive control of cog-
nition, we can see how conscious processing may involve a complementarity of E and
I control, prepared for each day’s experience by the previous night’s sleep. More than
just consolidation, the neurophysiology of sleep refines the organism’s cognitive model
of the world, starting with the critical and corrective mode—organized by the subcritical
inhibitory state of NREM sleep—and then progressing in the next stage of sleep to the
generative, imaginative, predictive mode that has been reorganized by the supercritical
excitability of REM sleep [33].
The neurophysiological underpinnings of consciousness can then be understood as
the regulation of neural networks by the primordial neural control systems, excitatory
phasic arousal (E) and inhibitory tonic activation (I). In this way, waking consciousness
emerges from our feelings, tuning in real time to criticality by degrees of excitatory elation
and inhibitory anxiety.
Remarkably, it is the extreme variations, from inhibitory consolidation in NREM to the
excitatory organization in REM, which consolidate their influences on memory in sleep. The
neurophysiological control of synaptic homeostasis [46,88] could then be reformulated as
more than a synaptic process, and rather as an adaptive organismic process, accumulating
homeostatic controls from the waking excursions of E and I not only to renormalize but to
realize their cognitive differentiation and integration in sleep.
5. The Criticality Hypothesis of Consciousness
With this background—on the foundations of excitatory and inhibitory control in the
dual memory systems—we can formulate a neurocomputational hypothesis to suggest
how subcortical mechanisms of waking arousal, with distinct qualities of feeling, organize
the dual limbic forms of working memory that—through their balanced interaction—
generate consciousness. The subcortical arousal controls—characterized as the pontine-
lemnothalamic phasic arousal for excitation (elation) and the midbrain-collothalamic tonic
activation for organismic inhibition (anxiety)—are the adaptive regulators of the dual
memory systems. These complementary control systems regulate consolidation each night
and then regulate active inference and experience during waking.
5.1. Excitatory–Inhibitory Balance and Criticality
Excitatory–inhibitory (E–I) balance is essential to organizing neural networks at mul-
tiple levels of the human nervous system [98]. This aspect of neuronal self-organization
can be complicated, such as in networks where an excitatory glutamatergic projection has
an inhibitory influence at a systemic level. An example is how the claustrum’s excitatory
projections to the cortex terminate on GABAergic interneurons that then exert a powerful
net inhibitory effect [91]. Acknowledging these complexities, we can see how E–I balanced
networks provide a cybernetic mechanism for constructing multiple levels of stable and
yet adaptive control in neural networks.
In our effort to align the neurodevelopmental process of progressive anatomical-
connectional self-organization with the Bayesian belief updating of active inference, we
have suggested that the excitatory control of the dorsal limbic division is the motive control
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 21 of 42
for the cortex’s generation of predictions, whereas the inhibitory control of the ventral
limbic division underlies error-correction [30,32]. One might ask how the organization of
complex information constructs—concepts and experiences in the attractor dynamics of
cell assemblies —inherit from the dynamics of network control in the brain.
5.2. Criticality in Brain Systems
In mathematical models of complex systems, there are remarkable increases in the
complexity of causal interactions at the point of criticality, exactly between two phases of
the system, such as order versus disorder [99]. Whereas the control properties are quasi-
linear at a distance from criticality, they become more complicated closer to criticality (e.g.,
exact E–I balance), where high-order terms can no longer be ignored. Intuitively, small
adjustments in E can be accommodated by small excursions in I in ways that are easily
manifest in hierarchically rich patterns that are not possible when either E or I dominate.
The result of E–I balance is a regime of cybernetic sensitivity that allows complex control of
a system when this balance is maintained [100].
Computational models of neural networks often show this exquisite sensitivity to
control parameters, as well as a wide dynamic range in responding to inputs, specifically
in the regime of control criticality [101]. However, developing measures of criticality has
been challenging. The clearest in vivo models have been neuronal avalanches [ 102], in
which the E–I balance determines optimal neural propagation (avalanche at 1/N where
N = number of target connections). At this point of optimality (stable rate of activity spread),
neural firing propagates through an ordered avalanche across the network: too low and it
stops; too high and it diverges exponentially out of control into a seizure. Convincing early
demonstrations have used large neural network simulations, in which simulated neurons
operate most efficiently in a large ensemble, with wide dynamic range, when maintained
at, or near, a critical balance [103].
5.3. Criticality at the Edge of Active Inference
Mathematical formulations of criticality bear a close parallel to the Bayesian appli-
cations of the free energy principle to active inference in the nervous system [ 23]. As
shown in Figure 4, the neural mechanisms of auditory perception begin with predictions
of what will be heard, and these predictions are updated (error-corrected) by the sensory
information. In unpacking this the gradient descent on free energy—using a model of bird
song perception—Friston et al. demonstrated the emergence of criticality, as a slowing of
the dynamics within a regime of instability, which is exactly aligned with minimizing free
energy (Figure 9 in Friston et al. [23]).
If we are correct in associating the motive control of prior predictions with the feed-
forward bias of the dorsal limbic division, complemented by the inhibitory control of
error-correction by the ventral limbic division and striatum [30,31], then there may be a
similar criticality of limbic control that is approached at the cutting edge (of chaos) in active
inference. This criticality emerges at the interface or surface where Bayesian priors meet the
error-correction likelihood of sensory evidence. For each perceptual, motor, and cognitive
operation, this ‘edge’ defines a Markov blanket [104,105]; namely, the boundary between
the intrinsic information of the self (the subjective Bayesian priors of private knowledge)
and the extrinsic information from the world (i.e., objective sensory-motor constraints for
reality-testing against observations).
5.4. Synchronizing Vertical Integration
If we are to anchor this model in neuroanatomy, achieving this balance in corticolimbic
control would require criticality throughout the vertical neuraxis. The neocortical networks
of the Structural Model—and the multiple Markov blankets at each hierarchical interface—
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 22 of 42
must be tuned by limbic excitatory (dorsal) and inhibitory (ventral) regulation. Moreover,
these limbic controls are fully dependent on their subcortical arousal and activation controls,
including the lemnothalamic pontine NE and 5HT neuromodulators of phasic arousal, as
well as the midbrain DA and pedunculopontine cholinergic (PPT ACh) neuromodulators
of tonic activation [73,75]. This dependency requires that self-regulation of criticality—in
neocortical processes of prediction and correction—achieves a long-range synchronization
of the major control structures of the neuraxis (Figure 2).
To speculate on the dynamic control for this vertical (neocortical-limbic-subcortical-
spinal) integration, we point to the phenomenon in criticality described as scale–invariant
correlation [99]. The brain seems to have evolved such that its excitatory controls achieve
the exact balance with its inhibitory controls as they gain a dynamic (necessarily latency-
adjusted) scale–invariant correlation across the multiple levels of control in the vertical
neuraxis, from the spinal cord to the frontal lobe.
By drawing on the control efficiency achieved by excitatory and inhibitory mechanisms
operating in balance at criticality , our hypothesis is that the motive controls regulating the
excitatory generation of prior predictions exactly balance the inhibitory feedback constraint of
error-correction at each level of the vertical neuraxis. Importantly , the Bayesian formulation
shows this clear range of criticality dynamics—revealed by the sensitive instability (i.e.,
sensitivity) induced by control parameters—where the descending prediction of the intrinsic
information meets sensory evidence from the world in the (ascending) feedback direction [23].
Thus, reasoning from how these modeling results align with the foundational principles
of vertebrate neuroanatomy , we propose that the balance between impulse and constraint [42]
is indeed an excitatory–inhibitory balance (in the control of the dual limbic memory systems).
Criticality then becomes an organismic control state, where these modes of self-regulation
achieve effective control dynamics for active inference in waking cognition.
This is how the control of the neurocomputational process of consciousness (active
inference) is regulated by our feelings. To be fully sentient, we must balance the limbic
control of excitement (feedforward limbifugal control of elation) with that of inhibition
(feedback limbipetal constraint of anxiety) in an exact and precisely regulated balance to
achieve the requisite state of criticality. The adaptive control of criticality then supports
hierarchical belief updating, and the metacognitive capacity for reflective awareness, that
we experience as conscious experience. On this view, maintaining criticality rests upon
deploying modulatory control that can be read as mental action that, in psychological
terms, speaks to sensory attenuation and selective attention.
5.5. Brain Criticality and Its Variations
The underlying neurophysiology of these dual memory control systems may be revealed
by recognizing that they have evolved to be consolidated separately in REM and NREM
sleep [106]. The waking cognition, described as active inference, may be optimized by a
closely regulated balance between the excitatory limbic feedforward control of descending
predictions, consolidated each night in REM, and the inhibitory limbic feedback control of
ascending corrections (prediction errors), consolidated each night in NREM.
Practically, the self-organized criticality of conscious processing is a delicate state
to maintain, as William James observed. More importantly, we need to become more
excited when opportunities arise (following what James described as his felt furtherances)
and attenuated when encountering threats (felt hindrances). As a result, the criticality
of consciousness appears to have evolved as a critical variations, naturally following a
process of Bayesian inference under uncertainty: Processing shifts between the differing
requirements for prediction (augmenting Bayesian priors to attenuate sensory evidence)
and correction (attenuating Bayesian priors to augment feedback constraints supplied by
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 23 of 42
sensory evidence). These requirements vary continuously in a capricious world depending
upon the relative confidence (i.e., precision) afforded by beliefs, relative to sensory evidence.
In a volatile (threat laden) world, greater precision or weight should be afforded sensory
evidence (e.g., in the form of precision-weighted prediction errors). Conversely, when in
a predictable scenario, more weight should be afforded to prior beliefs and their accom-
panying predictions. However, in both cases, balance has to be maintained for optimal
belief updating.
Because waking consciousness requires self-organized criticality (being awake enough
to pay attention), the full uncoupling of these adaptive control mechanisms may only be
possible in the unconscious stages of sleep. In sleep, the entire cerebral network architecture
can be consolidated first by the subcritical, inhibitory state of NREM and then by the
supercritical excitatory state of REM sleep. This conclusion is consistent with Hering’s [107]
formulation that—because consciousness requires ongoing support from the mechanisms
of memory—memory organization (consolidation) can only occur in the unconscious
workings of sleep [86].
As a result, the nightly outcomes of sleep are what set the stage for the balanced
excitatory and inhibitory controls on working memory that support active inference in
waking. In short, the most effective states of active inference and conscious awareness arise
when these control systems are balanced. In what follows, we provide a formal account of
criticality of this narrative.
Section 6 introduces the control parameters (excitation E and inhibition I) that un-
dergird criticality, using the formulation of variational free energy as complexity minus
accuracy [105]. The excitatory influence of elation enhances confidence in the prior beliefs
and provides more precise contextual guidance for hierarchical predictive processing. In
contrast, the inhibitory influence of anxiety increases prior uncertainty, thereby empha-
sizing the precision or influence of (corrective) sensory evidence. Section 7 presents a
summary of the criticality hypothesis, in which the dynamics of precision are regulated
by our feelings, and the ensuing free energy determines the felt breadth and stability of
conscious experience. Section 8 then extends the criticality hypothesis to include the home-
ostatic regulation of excitation and inhibition in sleep, in which excursions of E and I far
from criticality admit major forms of network reorganization that set the nightly stage for
the next morning’s ignition of conscious experience in regimes of self-organized criticality.
6. Excitatory Control of Complexity and Inhibitory Control of Accuracy
in Active Inference
6.1. Terms for Formulating the E–I Gain Control of Active Inference
In this section we provide a systematic statement of the limbic control of excitation
and inhibition in terms of gain control (Table 2).
Table 2. Definition of symbols used in the formulation of the E–I gain control.
Symbol Definition Interpretation Possible Neural Mechanism
o Sensory observations Data to be explained Primary sensory afferents
s Hidden (latent)
causes/states The causes of sensory input States of affairs in the world
q(s) Variational posterior Posterior belief distribution in
response to sensory evidence
Synaptic activity in cortical
hierarchies and
thalamocortical loops
p(s) Prior over s Prior beliefs or constraints Synaptic activity and efficacy
E Excitatory gain (i.e.,
prior precision)
Dorsal limbic,
lemnothalamic regulation
Pontine θ–γ multiplexing,
ACh, phasic LC-NE
I Inhibitory gain (i.e.,
sensory precision)
Ventral limbic,
collothalamic regulation
thalamic/striatal α/β bursts,
tonic LC-NE, VTA D2/D4
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 24 of 42
6.2. Overview of Active Inference and Neuronal Belief Updating
Active inference can be expressed as minimizing variational free energy (F) defined as
complexityminus accuracy [105]. In this Bayesian formulation, the brain estimates the causal
states of the world (s) given the sensory observations (o), under a generative model. A genera-
tive model is specified in terms of a likelihood and prior: e.g., p(o,s) = p(o|s)p(s). Inversion of
this model leads to an estimation of latent or hidden states in terms of a (variational) posterior
q(s), that minimizes (F):
F(q, o) = DKL[q(s)||p(s)] − Eq[ln p(o|s)]
= Eq[ln q(s) − ln p(s)] − Eq[ln p(o|s)] (1)
• The first term on the right is named complexity: it measures how far the posterior
solution q(s) deviates (by the Kullback–Leibler divergence, D KL) from the original
prior estimate p(s). This term minimizes free energy by keeping the updated beliefs
q(s) close to the priors p(s). In other words, it scores the degree to which observations
“change one’s beliefs.”
• The second term on the right is accuracy, defined as the expected likelihood that the
posterior beliefs (q) successfully predict the data o. A more accurate posterior belief
solution minimizes the fit error (e.g., precision-weighted prediction error) and thus
minimizes F.
Active inference can then be seen as finding the most likely causes of observations that
remain consistent with prior experience (i.e., the world is as you know it) yet is maximally
accurate in explaining the observed evidence. The active part of active inference can only
change observable outcomes and therefore can only change the accuracy through action;
however, here, we will be primarily concerned with perceptual inference.
6.3. Introducing the E–I Control Gains
The criticality hypothesis introduces two (affective) gain control or precision parame-
ters based on the literature on limbic regulation of cognition, feedforward excitation ( E)
and feedback inhibition (I) that determine how strongly each term (complexity or accuracy)
influences variational free energy. This formulation is based on the association of prior
precision (complexity) with the (excitatory) dorsal limbic division and the precision of
sensory constraints (accuracy) with the (inhibitory) ventral limbic division:
F(q, o) = DKL[q(s)q(E)q(I)||p(s, E, I)] − Eq[lnp(o|s, I)]
= Eq[ln q(s)q(E)q(I) − ln p(s)E − ln p(E,I)] − Eq[lnp(o|s)I]
= Eq[ln q(s) − E·ln p(s)] + DKL[q(E)q(I)||p(E,I)] − Eq [I·lnp(o|s)]
(2)
The excitatory control E can be thought of as enhanced confidence or precision that bi-
ases posterior beliefs towards prior predictions. The inhibitory control I can be thought
of as a complementary vigilance that is associated with an increased precision of the
likelihood—that accompanies anxiety—which biases belief updating towards fitting the
sensory evidence or observations. Note that E and I are simply scaling constants. Techni-
cally, they play the role of precision, where baseline priors and likelihoods (in bold) have a
Gibb’s form. Their expected values E and I then minimize variational free energy in a way
that depends on the functional form of the generative model:
E = arg min F(q(s)qE(E)q(I), o)
I = arg min F(q(s)q(E)qI(I), o) (3)
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 25 of 42
Please see Parr et al. for a detailed description for generative models based upon partially
observed Markov decision processes—and link to classical neuromodulators [ 44]. An
equivalent treatment of continuous state space models can be found in the literature of
variational Laplace [108]. For simplicity, we have ignored posterior beliefs about policies or
action in this basic formalism.
With this basic formalism in place, we can now consider qualitative consequences of
optimizing E and I, according to Equation (3), including conceptual coherence and temporal
persistence, via their effects on complexity and accuracy.
6.4. How E and I Regulate Cerebral Networks
Table 3 summarizes how the E and I factors of gain control operate to modulate the
precision factors for the priors and sensory error-correction in active inference.
Table 3. Regulation of Precision in Active Inference.
Gain Precision Computational Effect Oscillatory/Neurochemical
Correlate
E ↑ Prior precision
Explores narrower range of
priors (reduced conceptual scope
with increased central coherence)
θ–γ multiplexing, ACh,
phasic DA & LC-NE
I ↑ Sensory
precision
Precise, longer-lived responses to
sensory perturbations
α/β bursts, tonic LC-NE,
D2/D4
ρ = E/I Precision ratio Self-reliance vs
environment reliance
Day-dreaming vs
reality-checking
Criticality
Regime in which E and I are
balanced, so that ρ hovers near
the critical regime across the
diurnal cycle.
E–I phase portrait spiraling onto a limit-cycle at
criticality.
Equation (2) is the complexity–accuracy formulation of active inference with com-
plexity (E) and precision (I) gains applied to the two components of the generative model;
namely, the priors and likelihoods, respectively. Neuromodulatory systems are generally
thought to control these gains, cycling brain dynamics through excitatory and inhibitory
regimes, while ensuring criticality—in the sense of maintaining the right balance, so that
complexity constraints are never lost while, at the same time, observations continue to
inform belief updating. Criticality is assured because variational free energy is minimized,
following the arguments in [23].
7. Criticality of Consciousness
Table 3 considers the various aspects of excitation–inhibition ( E–I) balance in
belief updating.
7.1. Precision Dynamics of Feelings
Elation (E) accompanies increases in prior precision, subjectively inner confidence;
conversely, anxiety (I) reduces the contribution of prior constraints by increasing the preci-
sion of information conveyed by observations. Equivalently, anxiety sharpens vigilance
(sensory precision) to incoming prediction errors (enhancing NREM sleep pressure); while
elation blunts their ability to update posterior beliefs (enhancing REM sleep pressure).
7.2. Experience Bandwidth and Stability
Important effects of affective arousal on cognition and experience are the changing
conceptual scope of posterior representations and the temporal persistence of belief states.
Elation increases confidence and the scope of prior beliefs to explain (multimodal) sensory
evidence at hand. Ideation is expansive, holistic, and integrated. But this is at the expense
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 26 of 42
of sensitivity to evidence (e.g., prediction errors) and the temporal persistence of ensuing
belief updates. Anxiety narrows the associational cohesion afforded by precise priors,
such that ideation is externally focused and differentiated, which is accompanied by
enhanced temporal persistence of responses to sensory input. The nature of the belief
updating is subject to fluctuations (flightings and perchings), creating a kind of criticality of
conceptual differentiation and integration, determining whether we are focused, expansive,
or somewhere in between.
Anxiety (I) and elation ( E) direct attention to the sensorium and prior narratives,
respectively. Anxiety creates tonic activation and James’s perchings of consciousness.
Elation creates phasic arousal and orienting responses associated with James’s flightings
of consciousness. In either imbalanced state, E > I or E < I, we are affectively biased
and thus motivated in consistent ways (approaching or avoiding, respectively). Without
adequate sleep homeostasis, criticality may be elusive, and psychopathology may ensue.
This follows because sleep homeostasis is necessary to update the baseline priors that
underwrite complexity and its contribution to variational free energy.
7.3. Variational Free-Energy
Variational free energy is minimized as prediction accuracy increases for both perch-
ings and flightings of conscious experience. Anxiety speeds online correction; elation
speeds offline hypothesis consolidation. The statistical physics of control theory and the
correlates of criticality (e.g., critical slowing) suggest that experience has a variable extent
in time. Moreover, the exciting and inhibiting arousal control systems—our feelings of
furtherance or hindrance—structure this extent in predictable ways. In this regard, it is
useful to note that precision (i.e., control gain) plays the role of a rate constant that controls
the rate of belief updating and therefore the passage of subjective time as measured by
information rate [109].
With imprecise predictions, we cannot sense the future. And the past ceases to be
informative. In this sense, increased sensory precision ( I) tips the balance of evidence
accumulation towards sensory evidence and away from prior predictions, meaning that
we update our beliefs more quickly with less constraints from the past. Criticality expands
the experience of time to allow active inference to optimally integrate objective (sensory)
evidence and the predictions of subjective opportunity. Criticality is the broad zone for
stability and plasticity in the balanced moment. Yet balance is not enough: complexity
and accuracy are both necessary to minimize free energy and thus optimize the span
of consciousness.
7.4. Criticality Condition
Conscious flow feels vivid yet coherent when ρ stays near its optimum and we are
more or less in E–I balance. As we build up sleep debt during the day, we have the
homeostatic motivation to re-balance the memory systems during the nightly exercise of
NREM-REM memory consolidation. Then, after progressively self-organizing through the
nightly cycles, the E–I balance upon wakening is prepared more or less at criticality, so we
wake up more or less conscious. Criticality then allows for increased order in experience.
When both anxiety (differentiation) and elation (integration) are balanced and hierarchically
integrated [3,110], we achieve increased conceptual structure and information order (↓ F)
at the critical edge of active inference [23].
In contrast, when we are off-criticality, we are biased toward one control,E or I, more
than the other. This, of course, is necessary to become motivated (some combination of
elation feedforward impulse to approach or anxiety feedback constraint to avoid). The
variational cybernetics must be adaptive, responding to requirements for life. We self-
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 27 of 42
regulate to be differentiated when we have to make discriminations or integrated when
we need to see the big picture, thereby varying both conceptual structure and temporal
stability in degrees through variational criticality.
Phenomenological Summary: Elation widens conceptual scope, reduces the rate of
belief updating, boosts inner confidence (ρ ↑) and blunts sensory vigilance (ρ ↓). Anxiety
augments sensory attention (ρ ↓), lowers self-certainty (ρ ↑) yet sharpens feedback reliance.
Each of these arousal systems (E and I) are consciousness flow regulators. Their continuous
opposition nudges the system toward a moving, albeit often turbulent, window of criti-
cality where subjective experience feels both rich and differentiated, and yet coherent and
integrated at the same time.
8. Variational Dynamics of Sleep Pressure in Waking Consciousness
Figure 8 illustrates the circadian variation in E–I criticality. The sleep pressure of
REM (C process) is regulated over 24 h. by the coupled mechanisms of orexin and MCH
(melanin concentrating hormone). NREM pressure builds with the waking accumulation
of adenosine, and NREM suppresses arousal controls via the ventrolateral preoptic area
(VLPO). There is a marked drop to subcritical range with each NREM episode, and a phasic
excursion to supercriticality with multiple PGO discharges during each REM episode.
Fortunately, the avalanche propagation does not become supercritical (thereby avoiding
seizures) during REM sleep, even though the excitability of highly diverse associations (the
E parameter) is extreme. The ρ = E/I ratio plummets in each NREM interval, as inhibitory
control selectively differentiates and stabilizes the cerebral networks.
Figure 8. Circadian variation in criticality, illustrated by a simple model that implements NREM
and REM pressures to create the sleep stages, and criticality during consciousness, by tuning the
ratio ρ = E/I. The NREM stages trigger excursions to subcritical levels, and the REM bursts trigger
supercriticality.
8.1. Memory and Cognition Consolidation
The neurophysiological mechanisms of NREM and REM sleep serve as consolidation
mechanisms, operating to continue the process of active inference through inhibitory
specification of explicit memory in NREM and excitatory exercise of predictive capacity in
the context of the organism’s prior knowledge (Table 4).
Sleep therefore operates as a limit-cycle controller: NREM drains inhibitory pressure,
REM drains excitatory pressure, and their alternation returns precision variables to the
critical window needed for optimal consciousness for waking the next morning. Across
the night, each stage implements a distinct precision operation on centrifugal (top-down
priors: E) and centripetal (bottom-up corrections I), constraints, letting the brain uncover
causal relations that were implicit—but unrecognized—during wake. The sleeping mind
processes information through an inverted (differentiate and correct first in NREM, then
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 28 of 42
integrate and prepare to predict in REM) mode of active inference, in the absence of sensory
afference [33].
Table 4. Memory consolidation effects of NREM and REM sleep stages, complementing the neuro-
physiologic mechanisms of active inference in the nightly consolidation of memory.
Phase Precision Network
Consequence
Behavioral
Outcome
Early NREM I dominates
Sharpens synaptic
weights;
down-selects noisy
traces
Declarative
memory
stabilization
REM burst E dominates Integrates remote
associations
Insight, emotional
tagging
Late-night REM
dominance
ρ oscillates near
optimum E/I
balance
Network at ρ ≈ 1 Next-day critical
readiness
8.2. Balance of Adaptive Controls in the Stages of Sleep
The consolidation of memory is not a simple recording process, but a two-stage orga-
nizational process through which inhibitory neurophysiology (hippocampal sharp wave
ripples, spindles, and slow oscillations) in NREM sleep and the excitatory neurophysiology
of REM sleep (global cholinergic excitatory exercise of predictive priors in the absence of
sensory-motor contraints) sequentially organize both cognitive capacity and phenomenal
experience (Table 5).
Table 5. Neurophysiological mechanisms of NREM and REM sleep in regulating cognition
and experience.
Stage Prior
Precision E
Sensory
Precision I Computational Work Phenomenological
Residue
Stage-2 NREM
(spindles) ↘ moderate ↗ moderate
Event segmentation: spindles
carve the day’s stream into ~0.5
s packets. Hippocampal ripples
that co-occur under a spindle
trough bind elements that
consistently follow one
another—extracting hidden
probabilistic contingencies.
Morning “aha”
moments about
order (“the light
blew because the
breaker was
already flipped”).
Slow-wave
NREM (SWS) minimal maximal
Hierarchical nesting: each
slow-wave UP state embeds
multiple spindles which embed
ripples, building
multi-timescale directed graphs
of causality in medial
prefrontal cortex.
Feeling of settled
chronology; fewer
temporal
confusions
in recall.
Phasic REM ↑↑ broad ↓↓ brief
Generative replay: pontine
P-waves switch cortex into
model-sampling. Weakly
linked spindle chunks
co-activate, testing
counterfactual chains.
Dopamine tags successful
free-energy-reducing linkages.
Vivid dream
scenes where
remote ideas
collide; creative
insights
on waking.
Tonic REM tail moderate moderate
Re-binding: LC/orexin
micro-blips nudge sensory
precision upward, copying
REM-tested linkages back
into hippocampus.
Dream coherence
peaks just before
awakening—
memorable
story line.
Thus, NREM differentiates experiential components (objects) and encodes reliable
temporal order, while REM performs creative, holistic counterfactual exploration on that
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 29 of 42
scaffold. Their alternation tunes the underlying neurophysiological drivers of E and I, so
that waking network criticality begins the next day near its optimal corridor.
Under this account, the diurnal cycle of REM and NREM homeostasis changes their
balance during the waking consciousness of the day. The diurnal orexin/MCH cycle leaves
REM pressure high in the morning, such that the consciousness of the morning is weighted
toward E and integrative cognition. As NREM pressure builds in the afternoon due to
gradual adenosine build-up, the balance shifts toward I, leading to improved attentional
focus and cognitive routinization for detailed tasks.
9. The Criticality of Consciousness and Its Variational Control
The important evidence base for understanding consciousness may be the neurophysi-
ology of memory consolidation in sleep. What is described in cognitive neuroscience as
memory consolidation [42], appears to involve inhibitory mechanisms (NREM) alternating
with excitatory mechanisms (REM), each of which contextualizes the brain’s process of
correcting its actions and organizing its anticipation of future opportunities.
As we follow the implications of these dual modes of self-regulation into waking
cognition, the first question is the transition from alternation in the stages of sleep to the
simultaneous operation of these dual control systems in waking cognition. The hypothesis
is that consciousness provides expanded information capacity through E–I criticality with
a balance of the excitatory and inhibitory regulatory (memory and arousal) systems.
A second question is how the dynamic balance of these controls regulates ongoing
cognition and behavior, given their motive biases; varying from depression to elation for
the phasic arousal system and from security to anxiety for the tonic activation system.
This question is addressed by the hypothesis that consciousness is regulated adaptively—
through excursions between the phasic arousal of elated excitement ( E) and the tonic
activation of anxious inhibition (I)—in the adaptive criticality of Bayesian mechanics.
For both these operations, the consolidation of the dual-motive-memory systems in
sleep prepares them to support the cognitive operations of consciousness. Furthermore,
the motivational properties of the excitatory dorsal limbic division and inhibitory ventral
limbic division and striatum provide important clues to the structural changes in working
memory associated with criticality.
The dialectical balance between the dorsal limbic impulse ( E) and ventral limbic
constraint (I) in waking cognition provides the adaptive control of structure (conceptual
scope) and process (temporal persistence) that when optimally tuned admit the expanded
scope of metacognition that we experience as waking consciousness. By appreciating
the dual NREM and REM memory systems—through observing their unique forms of
inhibitory and excitatory neurophysiology in sleep—we may gain insight into the ongoing
forms of neuromodulatory control, including intrinsic motivational and affective properties,
that support memory access in waking consciousness. The exact balance of the dual memory
systems and their inherent adaptive controls may be essential to the expanded explanatory
scope of E–I criticality in consciousness. The controlled variations in E–I balance in waking
may then allow the dynamic operations of criticality to extend further into the fringes of
implicit prior predictions (E) and explicit environmental constraints (I) that are essential to
active inference.
Although the adaptive variations toward greater E or I—according to situational
demands—are integral to our hypothesis, the central phenomenon is the expansion of
information processing capacity that is achieved at the exact E–I balance. This is where we
propose that both the functional utility and the phenomenology of human consciousness
may arise.
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 30 of 42
9.1. Spanning the Specious Present
Integral to both effective cognition and experienced phenomenology is the continuity
of experience in time. William James emphasized that we must apprehend some consid-
erable duration in the stream of consciousness; otherwise, experience is reduced to the
specious present [7]. With no residual continuity of past memory, and no sense of the future,
the “present” of consciousness collapses to a point with no duration. Certainly, the concept
of working memory, or a global workspace [111], implies that there is some continuity of
cognitive operations in time. We propose that this emerges from (waking) contributions of
the dual memory systems operating at criticality.
A well-known marker of criticality in complex systems is the presence of long range
temporal correlations: extended relations of network patterns in time that emerge with the
appearance of criticality, such as we propose appear at exactE–I balance [99,101].
For example, in a recent demonstration of long range temporal correlations in cog-
nitively functional states of human consciousness, Muller and associates [112] examined
high frequency gamma oscillations (56 to 96 Hz) in the intracranial EEGs of patients with
epilepsy, using the autocorrelation function to characterize long-range correlations in the
propagation avalanches of high gamma, reflecting the regulation cortical activity at multi-
ple temporal scales. Cognitive functioning in the conscious state was associated with the
appearance of long-range correlations, whereas these autocorrelations were significantly
shortened by disruptions of consciousness, such as by interictal epileptiform discharges,
anti-seizure medications, or periods with slow-wave (sleep-like) activity.
Given the importance of empirical validation, the ability to measure the neurophysiol-
ogy of cortical excitatory mechanisms (such as gamma and theta-gamma phase coupling)
and inhibitory mechanisms (such as beta and alpha-beta phase coupling) in the EEG admits
empirical predictions about the span of neural states in time that allow empirical tests of
the criticality hypothesis.
Within the general regime of criticality, as described by the relations in Tables 2
and 3, variations in E and I will shift the limited capacity of waking working memory in
ways that determine how experience emerges from the specious present. This emergence
can be understood as the access to the information—encoded by synaptic connectivity—
experienced psychologically as mental associations. This access is parameterized by the
neural control system parameters of conceptual scope as enhanced by E and temporal
persistence as enhanced by I. These parameters reflect the E–I regulation of the dynamics of
what we might describe as corticolimbic resonance, patterns of neural activity traversing the
architecture of the Structural Model between the massive representational capacity of the
neocortex, hippocampus and dorsal limbic division (E) on the one hand and the amygdala,
striatum and ventral limbic division (I) on the other. These dual-motive-memory systems
provide dual modes of regulating consciousness [15] adaptively [33].
Excitation has the simple effect of increasing synaptic efficacy and expanding the scope
of associations enjoined by current consciousness. It is directly supported by the dorsal
limbic controls, including theta oscillations (recruiting the full pontine lemnothalamic
pathway that generates the PGO discharges of REM) and their recruitment of local gamma
phase-aligned cell assemblies that support the broad conceptual scope and feedforward
bias of the dorsal corticolimbic division. Due to the habituation bias of elation [73], there is a
corresponding reduction in temporal persistence that causes the access to broad associations
to be ephemeral.
Importantly, as formulated in Equation (1), balance toward E involves experiential
and behavioral dominance by the predictive, self-evidencing Bayesian priors, the intrinsic
domain of the self. The exaggerated elation ( E) of clinical mania is thus associated with
the flight of ideas, involving a failure of attention, and the untethering of belief updating
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 31 of 42
from sensory constraints. At the same time, with enhanced conceptual scope, moderate
degrees of mania (hypomania) lead to creative and expansive thinking [ 113,114]. When
unbalanced by sufficient anxiety, exaggerated mania leads to pathological grandiosity, due
to the narcissistic intrusion of the Bayesian priors of the self, without adequate constraint
from inhibitory anxiety.
In contrast, exaggerated anxiety (I), particularly without balance by adequate elation,
is associated with excessive focus and routinization of cognition, extending temporal per-
sistence and emphasizing feedback control for enhanced accuracy (i.e., sensory precision).
At the same time, there is a restriction of temporal scope that excludes future events from
consciousness, particularly those predictions associated with personal confidence, such
that uncertainty is maximal. Because the operation of prior predictions emerges from the
REM-consolidated self [115], the inhibitory constraint of these priors in high anxiety is not
only a constraint on creativity, but a constraint on self-evidencing [36].
Thus, the assimilation and accommodation of effective cognition involves a mode
of information processing that is also a mode of self-regulation. As the E–I balance is
regulated in the regime of criticality, the adaptive process of consciousness achieves both
optimal cognitive control and optimal personality control when the self-regulation of
feelings balances exactly at criticality.
9.2. Organizing Conceptual Complexity
Given the massive connections of the human brain, an important question is how the
dual-motive-memory systems contribute to the structure of the currently active represen-
tations (percepts and concepts) that are organized and experienced in consciousness. We
have proposed that the dual memory systems provide varying contributions to conceptual
scope, or breadth of cognitive associations, during their dominance of NREM and REM
sleep. A restricted scope and more differentiated structure support the delineation and
articulation of unpredicted events in NREM. A greatly expanded associational scope (more
holistic structure) allows the exercise of unbounded predictions in REM. These influences
appear to remain important to the ongoing modulation of conceptual structure and thus
cognitive organization in the criticality of waking consciousness.
Again, excursions from the critical regime are best seen in the exaggerated states
of affective arousal and activation. In clinical elation (mania), cognition becomes expan-
sive and grandiose (subjectively confident) to a fault. This reflects exaggerated, indeed
pathological, integration. In clinical anxiety, cognition becomes highly restricted in scope
to the ruminative, typically aversive, focus, as if consciousness is dominated by an ex-
tension of the inhibitory specification seen in NREM sleep, creating a pathological and
unbalanced differentiation.
At criticality, conceptual organization appears to benefit from a balance of integrat-
ing and differentiating influences, allowing not only differentiation and articulation of
elements and objects, but the hierarchic integration that allows abstract concepts [110,115].
In the statistical physics literature on criticality in complex systems, there may be a sim-
ilar phenomenon in which attractor dynamics (which can be related to the organization
of complex connectivity of transient cell assemblies) allow multiscale patterns [116]. The
network of relations allows not only short-distance relations or long-distance relations,
but dynamics that include multiple scales of effective connections within the network
simultaneously. Furthermore, the network becomes metastable, so that there are not large
variations in scale from moment to moment, but a maintenance of the multiscale patterns
over extended intervals [116]. To the extent that consciousness reflects the complex dynam-
ics of criticality, the structure of concepts may allow the metastable, multiscale network
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 32 of 42
patterns that support both integration and differentiation of information, and thus abstract
concepts, simultaneously.
10. The Background Limbic Variational Dynamics That Generate
Conscious Experience
The evidence on the consolidation of memory in sleep provides fundamental insights
into the neurophysiology of ongoing and complementary psychological self-organization
in both sleep and waking. The dual NREM and REM memory systems provide unique and
opponent forms of adaptive differentiation and integration of experience, respectively [33].
Because biological control has evolved with each learning and memory system, these
might best be described as motive-memory systems. The Bayesian mechanisms of active
inference precisely characterize this process, in which the organism’s daily and nightly
self-organization is grounded in the excitatory consolidation of the Bayesian, ontogenetic
priors of the self-world model in REM, in response to the automatic incorporation of the
unpredicted constraints from the environment in the inhibitory mechanisms of NREM.
To this point we have described the major excursions of inhibitory differentiation of
memory in NREM, complementing the excitatory integration of REM, and we hypothesized
that it is the simultaneous operations of these motive-memory systems that allows the
criticality of consciousness. Both memory systems are active in the background of waking
consciousness. Their excursions in periods of rest, reflection, or mind-wandering may
determine the unconscious background (the fringe of the E–I criticality of consciousness)
that continues those neurophysiological mechanisms of memory organization that are
exercised in their canonical forms in sleep.
We interpret these mechanisms of activity-dependent synaptic regulation of cognition
to reflect the continuing self-organization of neural development [ 42]. In light of this
developmental perspective, it may be appropriate to use Jean Piaget’s developmental
model of cognition [117,118] to illustrate how ongoing unconscious conceptual operations
in waking may continue the preparation for consciousness that is begun in each night’s
inhibitory NREM and excitatory REM states.
Piaget described the child’s cognition as varying between assimilation, when expe-
riences can be integrated within the child’s existing conceptual schemas (we might say
Bayesian priors of predictive control), and accommodation, when reality does not fit the
familiar expectations of the self, and concepts (self-evidencing) must be error-corrected by
the new evidence. This model clearly frames conceptual self-organization in a predictive-
corrective process that aligns well with active inference. This alignment can be extended to
include not only the nightly reorganization of the self in NREM and REM memory consoli-
dation, but also the waking processes of integrating ongoing active and reflective experience
with variational excursions that bring the spontaneous and unconscious operations of the
dual limbic memory systems—once they are adequately developed—into consciousness.
The neurophysiological mechanisms of these corticolimbic dynamics, including their
extensive reliance on subcortical control, is gradually becoming clear. We can now align
the oscillatory dynamics of corticolimbic networks with excitatory operations linked with
primary dorsal limbic excitatory control (phasic arousal), including theta modulation
of local gamma oscillations [119]. We can also characterize the mechanisms of inhibitory
control, under primary ventral limbic and striatal-thalamic control, including beta and alpha
oscillations [120–122]. With the recognition that local cell assemblies of columnar networks—
and thus the attractor dynamics of cognitive and memory networks—are synchronized by
both excitatory and inhibitory operations, the implication is that the ongoing cortico-limbic-
striatal dynamics are cycling at these control frequencies (7 Hz, 10 Hz, 20 Hz), thereby
constructing candidate network cell assembly attractors hundreds of times per minute.
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 33 of 42
What appears in consciousness may then be the unique stabilization and critical
slowing of these unconscious corticolimbic dynamics of memory function during the
ephemeral periods of E–I criticality. The contributions of active inference to ongoing
cognition can then be understood as the variations between E and I control with differing
contributions of the dual-motive-memory systems to the dominant, emergent predictive
impulses and corrective constraints that are stabilized in those moments of criticality that
yield distinct consciousness.
10.1. Excitatory Generation of Predictions
The generative process of organizing predictions may draw preferentially upon the
contributions of the dorsal limbic division and its excitatory REM memory system in
waking cognition [31]. Hobson emphasized a similar view as he described the REM-like
protoconsciousness in creative thought [122] and in the generative process that constructs
the predictive priors of active inference [114]. With the hippocampus at its base, the dorsal
limbic division may be well suited to rehearse memory representations and fragments with
hedonic significance for personal affordances [123,124], engaging the anterior cingulate
loop to recruit pattern-completion in the CA3 region of the hippocampus, such as through
the excitatory theta-nested gamma bursts [ 120] to organize a nascent prediction stream,
pre-activating likely cortical states and extending the fringes of the specious present so that
consciousness arrives to a field already rich with integrative gist.
In the framework of Hobson and Friston [114], these dorsal limbic operations would
engage the REM-like memory system for theprimary cognition that allows both fantasies and
personally meaningful predictive schemas. Based on this REM-like feedforward memory
system, operating from the holistic priors of personal affordances [30], this component of
background memory is similar to Piaget’sassimilation. The unconscious activities of waking
memory can be expected to proceed in ways that are congruent with the prior expectations
of the self, recently organized in the nightly excitatory reorganizations of REM sleep.
10.2. Selective Inhibitory Specification
In a similar fashion, the cognitive process supporting waking active inference may be
supported by ongoing dynamics of unconscious working memory that activate information
relevant to constraint and error-correction through the inhibitory neurophysiology that
has consolidated information uniquely in NREM sleep [ 33]. Particularly important to
background ruminations may be the ventral limbic controls over the patch division of the
striatum that uniquely regulates the midbrain inhibitory control over corticostriatal loops.
The ventral limbic cortices, amygdala, and paralimbic hippocampal fields converge on
the patch (striosome) compartment of the ventral striatum, whereas multimodal isocortical
and sensorimotor streams preferentially target the surrounding matrix [125]. Viral-tracing
and connectomics now show that striosomes send dense, GABA-ergic projections to the
dopamine (DA) neurons of the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc) and ventral tegmental
area (VTA), enabling the patch system to pause—and then rebound—midbrain DA out-
put. In parallel, the medium-spiny neurons of the striatal matrix discharge along classic
direct/indirect pathways toward pallidum and thalamo-cortical relays. Consistent with
the recognition of ventral limbic self-regulation through collothalamic interactions with
the midbrain [30], the midline collothalamic nuclei (paraventricular, reuniens, intralam-
inar) provide a complementary limbic input to both striosome (patch) and matrix, but
they bias toward striosomes, giving the patch compartment a privileged window onto
arousal/uncertainty signals that originate in the midbrain.
These mechanisms may be integral to the unconscious mechanisms of rumination
and inhibitory specification in working memory that allow both the differentiation and
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 34 of 42
causal attribution of unpredicted events. Because striosomes can veto SNc/VTA firing,
they implement a high-level inhibitory gain control over dopaminergic teaching or en-
abling signals [125]. When cortical-limbic prediction errors accumulate, patch inhibition
transiently suppresses tonic DA, sharpening the contrast for subsequent phasic bursts that
pull the matrix—and its cortical partners—into a new synaptic configuration. This two-
step process can be described as inhibitory specification: (i) a brief dampening of outdated
information-action patterns, (ii) a rebound DA surge that stamps in a re-weighted action-
outcome map. In network terms, patch activity first widens the landscape of accessible
attractors, while matrix plasticity then instantiates the selected attractor once the critical
balance is re-established.
Recognizing that the ventral limbic regulation of these striatal-midbrain inhibitory
specification dynamics is integral not only to limbic but neocortical function, the inhibitory
reset of feedback information patterns may be candidate mechanisms for information
differentiation, object delineation, and Piagetian accommodation. Piaget’s accommoda-
tion process is the necessary updating of a child’s cognitive schema when reality refuses
to fit. The patch–matrix mechanism of the striatum offers a neural mechanism. The
patch/striosome mechanism silences midbrain DA, which marks the existing assimilation
system insufficient to fit perception, thereby loosening synaptic priors and preparing the
ground for change. Then, once an alternative expectancy proves predictive, matrix-driven
corticostriatal loops engrain the revised sequence of states and actions. This mechanism,
cycling with corticostriatal loops at the beta frequency, provides the background process-
ing that allows anxious ruminations to gain purchase in the unconscious precursors of
conscious reasoning.
10.3. The Variational Backstage for the Momentary Appearances of Conscious Criticality
The consolidation of memory in disparate stages of sleep allows the inhibitory (largely
striatal-thalamic GABAergic) mechanisms of delineating and articulating unpredicted events
to alternate with the excitatory (largely lemnothalamic and forebrain) mechanisms of re–
integrating the predictive capacity of the organism [33]. In waking, these memory processes
are more or less simultaneous across the full vertical hierarchy of the neuraxis (Figures 1 and 7),
and their continuing corticolimbic dynamics can be expected to provide the access to working
memory that allows both spontaneous and deliberate forms of cognition and the attendant
experiences of consciousness. During quiet rest, the dorsal limbic impulse drives associative
breadth, and semantic distance increases, whereas inhibitory specification periodically tightens
the evidence constraint, forcing conceptual differentiation.
The alternation yields a rolling dialectic in the variational corticolimbic dynamics of
background preparations for consciousness. The impulsive operations of the REM memory
system generate a predictive sweep across latent mental associations, leading to expansive
and often hedonic daydreams, and occasional intuitive leaps in problem-solving. The
constrained and focusing operations of the NREM memory system lead to reactive cuts
of the associational matrix, sharpening on a critical feature and allowing this feature to be
reconstituted through the patch-DA-matrix mechanism in a new causal context. This cycle,
repeated hundreds of times per minute in the cortico-subcortical loops, beneath awareness,
maintains criticality: enough redundancy for flexible meaning, enough selectivity for
actionable clarity.
The result is the unconscious operations of working memory that process ongoing
experiences to be enjoined in the conscious perchings of criticality. In this way, conscious
experience can be seen as the momentary after-image of the unconscious processes of
assimilation and accommodation.
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 35 of 42
11. Limitations and Directions for Future Research
While the criticality framework presented here offers a powerful formulation of con-
sciousness as arising from the dynamic balance of integration and differentiation, it remains
incomplete in its current form. Specifically, it lacks a mechanistic account of self-awareness—
the subjectivity that defines conscious experience as being for someone. This limitation is
not unique to the present model. Formal implementations of active inference have similarly
been criticized for failing to explain the feeling of being—the intrinsic directedness and
agency of phenomenal consciousness.
11.1. Affective Dynamics as the Structure of Subjectivity
We propose that this gap may be narrowed by introducing the role of affectively
regulated excitation and inhibition as a computational substrate of intentionality. The
propagation of excitation (E), particularly through dorsal limbic circuits, enables expansive,
feedforward integration across the cortical hierarchy. This excitatory mode underlies ela-
tion, openness, and the anticipatory drive associated with intentional action. In contrast,
inhibitory regulation (I), routed through ventral limbic and basal forebrain systems, im-
poses feedback constraint—shaping prediction by enforcing precision. Subjectively, this
mode is associated with anxiety, focused vigilance, and the narrowing of experiential scope.
These affective states—elation and anxiety—are not secondary to cognition; they are
the computational control systems that determine the scope and granularity of inference.
They shape the balance of integration and differentiation, and in doing so, structure the
architecture of experience. The self is not a separate processor; it is the coherently regulated
field of these dynamics, evolving in real time.
11.2. Intentionality Disrupted: Absence Seizures and the Fragility of Self
Evidence from clinical neurophysiology offers a compelling demonstration of how
these dynamics can fail. Absence seizures, characterized by transient lapses in behavior
without postural collapse or overt loss of consciousness, reveal a specific disruption of
intentionality. The person ceases speaking, moving, or engaging for many seconds, yet
appears awake, upright, and unaware of their disconnection.
Electrophysiologically, these seizures involve spike-wave discharges across anterior
thalamocortical components of the Papez circuit, disrupting feedforward processing in
dorsal limbic networks. Unlike limbic seizures involving the hippocampus or amygdala,
absence seizures preserve arousal but collapse the generative model of action. In essence,
the self ceases to intend, though the body remains conscious.
This suggests that intentionality—and by extension, self-awareness—requires not only
inferential updating, but a coherent excitatory drive from dorsal limbic systems, regulated
by affect and situated within a hierarchical network architecture.
11.3. Multiscale Modularity as the Substrate of Self-Referentiality
As one of the reviewers of this paper rightly noted,E/I dynamics alone are insufficient
to explain the recursive embodiment necessary for consciousness. What is required is a
multiscale, modular architecture capable of supporting reentrant inference loops across
temporal and spatial hierarchies. The brain meets this requirement.
The brain’s functional networks can be shown to be hierarchically modular, with
stable substructures at multiple nested scales [ 126]. Alemdar and associates emphasize
multiscale intermittency—transient, cross-scale instabilities that dynamically reconfigure
global dynamics. These instabilities are not noise; they are likely the control surfaces
by which high-level affect modulates lower-level computation [ 127]. Sbitnev [ 128] ar-
gues that self-referential intentionality emerges only when functional gradients support
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 36 of 42
causally closed, scale–integrating loops—conditions satisfied only in complex, biologically
embodied architectures.
In a multiscale framework as described by these authors, we would argue that self-
awareness is not a symbolic operation, but a multiscale dynamical resonance, recursively
sustained through affectively gated excitation and inhibition across hierarchical modular
networks. The implicit, felt subject of experience is the locally coherent, globally embedded
field of inference.
11.4. Future Directions: Toward Affective-Critical Neurocomputational Models of Selfhood
To simulate this structure computationally, models must go beyond symbolic active
inference and incorporate multiscale nested networks with recurrent, reentrant dynamics.
It will also be important to formulate affectively tunable E/I parameters that regulate
integration and differentiation across levels. Finally, mechanisms for state persistence, at-
tractor layering, and flexible modular switching will be necessary to implement hierarchical
modularity in an effective neurocomputational framework.
Ultimately, we believe that the balance of elation and anxiety, implemented as dynami-
cally regulated E/I control across hierarchical modules, constitutes a testable and generative
model of the self. It provides a biologically grounded mechanism for intentionality, and a
path forward for Bayesian neurocomputational modeling of consciousness.
12. Conclusions: Adaptive Control of Variational Criticality
In our survey of the neurophysiological mechanisms of consciousness, we propose that
the memory systems for supporting working memory in waking cognition are grounded in
the excitatory and inhibitory corticolimbic dynamics whose mechanisms are revealed in
the alternations between NREM and REM sleep. As they are engaged in waking cognition,
these memory systems bring their inherent motive biases, the integral motive biases of the
dorsal and ventral limbic systems [31,33], to regulate the criticality of consciousness.
In waking experience and behavior, the dual memory systems operate simultaneously
in what we propose is a close balance that achieves the efficient control stability and
information processing capacity of E/I balance. This balance appears most flexible when it
includes adaptive excursions, such that a dominance ofE allows the dorsal limbic system to
regulate the entire synaptic network with a feedforward bias toward generative predictions,
and at other times, the dominance of I allows the network to be regulated by the inhibitory
control of the ventral limbic division. It is this adaptive control, exerted largely by the
ongoing and largely unconscious operations of the dual memory systems, that we describe
as the criticality that generates consciousness.
Thus adaptive, motivated control is integral to the operation of each memory system.
In NREM sleep, the replay of significant events, delineated through spindle-coupling of
hippocampal sharp waves, and overall inhibitory control through slow oscillations, are the
candidate mechanisms for engaging the explicit memory consolidated in NREM. These are
mechanisms for organizing the synaptic cell assemblies that constitute memories, through
the ventral limbic inhibitory forms of control, associated with the motive bias of anxiety.
The fact that unpredicted events gain some unique identification—that flags them for the
specific NREM delineation and consolidation in sleep—suggests that some kind of limbic
resonance during waking prepares the representation of these events for priority NREM
processing [33]. It is consistent with this mechanism to propose that the waking process of
explicit recall during ongoing cognition is also engaged by similar mechanisms of limbic
inhibitory control, differentiated, articulated, and stabilized in the informatic status quo by
the affective control of anxiety (I). NREM sleep thus prepares the waking unconscious mind
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 37 of 42
for the continuing support it provides to waking working memory and the preconscious
preparations for conscious thought.
In a different way, the predictive control bias of the dorsal limbic division appears to
be integral to the excitatory consolidation of REM sleep. Although content reports of REM
dreams include many negative and threatening events [129], certain findings suggest that
the reorganization or reconsolidation of existing memories in REM sleep includes a positive
adaptive bias (E) that endows the reorganized priors to engender predictions aligned with
the organism’s adaptive coping efforts. Thus after aversive stimulation in rodent studies,
followed by re-exposure to the same context without aversive stimulation, REM appears
essential to what is calledextinction memory, the formation of an overlay or adaptation of the
older aversive memory for the new, more recent non-aversive memory of the context [130].
Importantly, the original aversive memory is not lost, as evidenced by its rapid restoration
by new training. Observing the disruption of REM in human post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD), Pace-Schott and associates have suggested that effective sleep is protective for
PTSD through REM’s capacity to reframe (repress) aversive experiences through a process
analogous to extinction memory. This positive adaptive bias may be integral not only to the
memory reconsolidation of REM, but to the dorsal limbic memory system’s contribution to
the feedforward (forward-looking) control of waking cognition.
12.1. Experimental Predictions
Perhaps the clearest experimental prediction is that there are dual memory systems,
with integrating versus differentiating capacities, and they are inherently motivated by
elation (E) and anxiety (I), respectively. There are increasingly robust measures of the neu-
rophysiological oscillations of cortical excitation and inhibition for testing the hypothesis
of criticality, such as with measures of theta-gamma coupling for excitation and alpha-beta
modulation for inhibition [120,121].
With behavioral measures, the current cognitive neuroscience literature includes
increasingly sophisticated paradigms for examining neural mechanisms of memory, such
as are contrasted by broad generalization versus remembering specific features [ 131].
With appropriate experimental and neurophysiological measures, the prediction can be
tested that the motive bias of E (elation) is integral to the feedforward REM memory
(generalization) whereas the control system of I (anxiety) is essential for the feedback
NREM (specification) memory system.
12.2. Phenomenological Implications
Subjectively, because the dual memory systems are balanced at criticality, conscious-
ness may appear to maintain affective neutrality. However, for criticality, adaptive shifts
must occur in the unconscious background mechanisms of memory, according to our
formulation, which may be sensed by the furtherances and hindrances, as subtle changes
in the affective quality of subjective experience. For example, prior to a creative insight,
a brief shift toward E and integrative thinking may allow the expansive ( protoconscious)
apprehension of novel associations [122]. When it is drawn into criticality and stabilized
by balanced inhibitory control, this novel construction would be experienced as a sudden
insight, with the attendant effect of some degree of elation. Importantly, a shift towardI
dominance (with the attendant quality of anxiety) may indeed be necessary in order to
stabilize this new insight and allow it to be sufficiently focused for retention (including
in subsequent NREM sleep). As a result of these preparatory excursions in the process
of working memory—involving both optimistic creative prediction and critical focused
correction—we may find the most objective reasoning to require variations from criticality
to achieve these forms of affective self-regulation.
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 38 of 42
Through recognizing the nature of the dual memory systems, the hypothesis of con-
sciousness as integrated information [3] can indeed be tested, both experimentally and
experientially. Thus, according to our analysis, information integration in consciousness
requires the excitatory control of the REM memory system. Interestingly, however, the
feedforward REM-consolidated memory system appears not to contribute to the explicit
memory associated with focal, declarative consciousness of qualia. Rather, excitatory REM
consolidation in sleep (and we would expect the continuation in waking) supports the
implicit memory that is non-declarative [87]. If consciousness is defined as explicit qualia,
as often seems the case, then integrated information theory would not only be falsifiable,
but falsified.
Instead, to appreciate the more implicit experience that facilitates information inte-
gration may require a broader appreciation of the intuitive and non-declarative, preverbal
states of consciousness [47,50,132] where integrated information seems to be achieved as
an essential capacity of experience.
Conversely, if consciousness is associated with differentiated information [3], then the
explicit declarative qualia can indeed be aligned with the differentiating memory system,
which can now be identified with the inhibitory neurophysiology of NREM sleep.
12.3. The Entropic Nadir of Criticality
Because the dual memory systems are organized through their motivationally biased
excitatory and inhibitory neurophysiological mechanisms, both subjective and objective
qualities of consciousness may be explained by the variations in these mechanisms, differen-
tiating experience at times through inhibitory specification and constraint, and integrating
it at other times through the holistic scope of excitatory control. Yet as critical as these
variations are for adaptive control, enacting the affective control of experience through each
day’s conceptual variations and each night’s E/I excursions in memory organization, they
reflect both energetic effort and subjective need bias in proportion to their deviation from
balance. Only at the exact balance at E/I criticality is free energy minimized sufficiently [23]
to allow the control sensitivity for optimal subjective consciousness to emerge.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, D.M.T., P .L. and K.J.F.; writing—original draft preparation,
D.M.T., P .L. and K.J.F.; writing—review and editing, D.M.T., P .L. and K.J.F. All authors have read and
agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work received funding from US National Institutes of Aging project R44AG077965.
Data Availability Statement: No new data were created or analyzed in this study.
Conflicts of Interest: Authors Don M. Tucker and Phan Luu were employed by the company
Brain Electrophysiology Laboratory Company. The remaining authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.
References
1. Baars, B.J. A Cognitive Theory of Consciousness; Cambridge University Press: New York, NY, USA, 1986.
2. Dehaene, S.; Changeux, J.P . Experimental and theoretical approaches to conscious processing.Neuron 2011, 70, 200–227. [CrossRef]
3. Tononi, G.; Koch, C. The neural correlates of consciousness: An update. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 2008, 1124, 239–261. [CrossRef]
4. Klincewicz, M.; Cheng, T.; Schmitz, M.; Sebastián, M.Á.; Snyder, J.S. What makes a theory of consciousness unscientific? Nat.
Neurosci. 2025, 28, 689–693. [CrossRef]
5. Tononi, G.; Albantakis, L.; Barbosa, L.; Boly, M.; Cirelli, C.; Comolatti, R.; Ellia, F.; Findlay, G.; Casali, A.G.; Grasso, M.; et al.
Consciousness or pseudo-consciousness? A clash of two paradigms. Nat. Neurosci. 2025, 28, 694–702. [CrossRef]
6. Tononi, G. Consciousness as integrated information: A provisional manifesto. Biol. Bull. 2008, 215, 216–242. [CrossRef]
7. James, W. Principles of Psychology; Holt: New York, NY, USA, 1890.
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 39 of 42
8. Chalmers, D. The hard problem of consciousness. In The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness; Wiley: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2007;
pp. 225–235.
9. Nagel, T. The View from Nowhere; Oxford University Press: New York, NY, USA, 1986.
10. Nagel, T. What is it like to be a bat? In The Language and Thought Series; Harvard University Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 1980;
pp. 159–168.
11. Damasio, A.R. The Feeling of What Happens: Body and Emotion in the Making of Consciousness; Mariner Books: New York, NY, USA, 2000.
12. Merker, B. Consciousness without a cerebral cortex: A challenge for neuroscience and medicine. Behav. Brain Sci. 2007, 30, 63–81.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Solms, M. The Hidden Spring: A Journey to the Source of Consciousness; WW Norton & Company: New York, NY, USA, 2021.
14. Chanes, L.; Barrett, L.F. Redefining the role of limbic areas in cortical processing. Trends Cogn. Sci. 2016, 20, 96–106. [CrossRef]
15. Chanes, L.; Barrett, L.F. The predictive brain, conscious experience, and brain-related conditions. In The Philosophy and Science of
Predictive Processing; Bloomsbury Publishing: New York, NY, USA, 2020; pp. 159–169.
16. Mumford, D. On the computational architecture of the neocortex. I. The role of the thalamo-cortical loop. Biol. Cybern. 1991,
65, 135–145. [CrossRef]
17. Mumford, D. On the computational architecture of the neocortex. II. The role of cortico-cortical loops. Biol. Cybern. 1992,
66, 241–251. [CrossRef]
18. Rao, R.P .; Ballard, D.H. Dynamic model of visual recognition predicts neural response properties in the visual cortex.Neural
Comput. 1997, 9, 721–763. [CrossRef]
19. Rao, R.P .; Ballard, D.H. Predictive coding in the visual cortex: A functional interpretation of some extra-classical receptive-field
effects. Nat. Neurosci. 1999, 2, 79–87. [CrossRef]
20. Hinton, G.E. Learning multiple layers of representation. Trends Cogn. Sci. 2007, 11, 428–434. [CrossRef]
21. Rumelhart, D.E.; McClelland, J.L. Parallel Distributed Processing: Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition. Vol I: Foundations;
MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 1986.
22. Friston, K. Functional integration and inference in the brain. Prog. Neurobiol. 2002, 68, 113–143. [CrossRef]
23. Friston, K.; Breakspear, M.; Deco, G. Perception and self-organized instability.Front. Comput. Neurosci. 2012, 6, 44. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
24. Friston, K. A free energy principle for a particular physics. arXiv 2019, arXiv:1906.10184. [CrossRef]
25. Bastos, A.M.; Usrey, W.M.; Adams, R.A.; Mangun, G.R.; Fries, P .; Friston, K.J. Canonical microcircuits for predictive coding.
Neuron 2012, 76, 695–711. [CrossRef]
26. Adams, R.A.; Shipp, S.; Friston, K.J. Predictions not commands: Active inference in the motor system. Brain Struct. Funct. 2013,
218, 611–643. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27. Wiese, W.; Friston, K.J. The neural correlates of consciousness under the free energy principle: From computational correlates to
computational explanation. Philos. Mind Sci. 2021, 2. [CrossRef]
28. Friston, K.J.; Wiese, W.; Hobson, J.A. Sentience and the origins of consciousness: From Cartesian duality to Markovian monism.
Entropy 2020, 22, 516. [CrossRef]
29. Friston, K. Am I Self-Conscious? (Or Does Self-Organization Entail Self-Consciousness?). Front. Psychol. 2018, 9, 579. [CrossRef]
30. Luu, P .; Tucker, D.M.; Friston, K. From active affordance to active inference: Vertical integration of cognition in the cerebral cortex
through dual subcortical control systems. Cereb. Cortex 2024, 34, 1–30. [CrossRef]
31. Tucker, D.M.; Luu, P . Adaptive control of functional connectivity: Dorsal and ventral limbic divisions regulate the dorsal and
ventral neocortical networks. Cereb. Cortex 2023, 33, 7870–7895. [CrossRef]
32. Friston, K.J.; Lin, M.; Frith, C.D.; Pezzulo, G.; Hobson, J.A.; Ondobaka, S. Active Inference, Curiosity and Insight. Neural Comput.
2017, 29, 2633–2683. [CrossRef]
33. Tucker, D.M.; Luu, P .; Friston, K.J. Adaptive consolidation of active inference: Excitatory and inhibitory mechanisms for organizing
feedforward and feedback memory systems in sleep. Cereb. Cortex 2025, 35, bhaf122. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34. Limanowski, J.; Blankenburg, F. Minimal self-models and the free energy principle. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 2013, 7, 547. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
35. Palmer, C.J.; Seth, A.K.; Hohwy, J. The felt presence of other minds: Predictive processing, counterfactual predictions, and
mentalising in autism. Conscious. Cogn. 2015, 36, 376–389. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36. Hohwy, J. The self-evidencing brain. Noûs 2016, 50, 259–285. [CrossRef]
37. Hohwy, J.; Michael, J. 16 Why should any body have a self? In The Subject’s Matter: Self-Consciousness and the Body; MIT Press:
Cambridge, MA, USA, 2017; Volume 363, pp. 364–398.
38. Limanowski, J. (Dis-) Attending to the body. In PPP-Philosophy and Predictive Processing; Open MIND; Frankfurt am Main: MIND
Group: Frankfurt, Germany, 2017.
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 40 of 42
39. Sandved-Smith, L.; Hesp, C.; Mattout, J.; Friston, K.; Lutz, A.; Ramstead, M.J. Towards a computational phenomenology of
mental action: Modelling meta-awareness and attentional control with deep parametric active inference. Neurosci. Conscious.
2021, 2021, niab018. [CrossRef]
40. Da Costa, L.; Sandved-Smith, L.; Friston, K.; Ramstead, M.J.; Seth, A.K. A Mathematical Perspective on Neurophenomenology.
arXiv 2024, arXiv:2409.20318. [CrossRef]
41. Tellegen, A. Structures of mood and personality and their relevance to assessing anxiety, with and emphasis on self-report. In
Anxiety and the Anxiety Related Disorders; Tuma, A.H., Maser, J.D., Eds.; Erlbaum: Hillsdale, MI, USA, 1985; pp. 681–706.
42. Tucker, D.M.; Luu, P . Cognition and Neural Development; Oxford University Press: New York, NY, USA, 2012.
43. Hesp, C.; Smith, R.; Parr, T.; Allen, M.; Friston, K.J.; Ramstead, M.J. Deeply felt affect: The emergence of valence in deep active
inference. Neural Comput. 2021, 33, 398–446. [CrossRef]
44. Parr, T.; Friston, K.J. Uncertainty, epistemics and active inference. J. R. Soc. Interface 2017, 14, 20170376. [CrossRef]
45. Luu, P .; Tucker, D.M. Continuity and change in neural plasticity through embryonic morphogenesis, fetal activity-dependent
synaptogenesis, and infant memory consolidation. Dev. Psychobiol. 2023, 65, e22439. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46. Tononi, G.; Cirelli, C. Sleep function and synaptic homeostasis. Sleep. Med. Rev. 2006, 10, 49–62. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47. Tucker, D.M.; Johnson, M. The Emotional Mind: How Feelings Shape Thought. 2025; Unpublished work.
48. D’Esposito, M.; Postle, B.R. The cognitive neuroscience of working memory. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2015, 66, 115–142. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
49. Dewey, J. Experience and Nature. In The Later Works, 1925–1953 ; Boydston, J.A., Ed.; Southern Illinois University Press:
Carbondale, IL, USA; Edwardsville, IL, USA, 1925; Volume 1, pp. 274–275.
50. Tucker, D.M.; Luu, P .; Johnson, M. Neurophysiological mechanisms of implicit and explicit memory in the process of consciousness.
J. Neurophysiol. 2022, 128, 872–891. [CrossRef]
51. García-Cabezas, M.Á.; Zikopoulos, B.; Barbas, H. The Structural Model: A theory linking connections, plasticity, pathology,
development and evolution of the cerebral cortex. Brain Struct. Funct. 2019, 224, 985–1008. [CrossRef]
52. Tucker, D.M.; Luu, P . Motive control of unconscious inference: The limbic base of adaptive Bayes.Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 2021,
128, 328–345. [CrossRef]
53. Gabriel, M.; Sparenborg, S.P .; Stolar, N. An executive function of the hippocampus: Pathway selection for thalamic neuronal
significance code. In The Hippocampus; Isaacson, R.L., Pribram, K.H., Eds.; Plenum: New York, NY, USA, 1986; Volume 4, pp. 1–39.
54. Pribram, K.H. Emotions. In Handbook of Clinical Neuropsychology; Filskov, S.K., Boll, T.J., Eds.; Wiley: New York, NY, USA, 1981;
pp. 102–134.
55. Aggleton, J.R.; Brown, M.W. Episodic memory, amnesia, and the hippocampal-anterior thalamic axis. Behav. Brain Sci. 1999,
22, 425–489. [CrossRef]
56. Squire, L.R. Mechanisms of memory. Science 1986, 232, 1612–1619. [CrossRef]
57. Papez, J.W. A proposed mechanism of emotion. Arch. Neurol. Psychiatry 1937, 38, 725–743. [CrossRef]
58. Jones, E.G. The Thalamus; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 2007; Volume I.
59. Nauta, W. A survey of the limbic system. Alcohol. Drug Res. 1985, 6, 67–68. [PubMed]
60. Yakovlev, P .I. Motility, behavior and the brain. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 1948, 107, 313–335. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
61. Blumer, D.; Benson, D.F. Personality changes with frontal and temporal lobe lesions. InPsychiatric Aspects of Neurologic Disease;
Benson, D.F., Blumer, D., Eds.; Gruen and Stratton: New York, NY, USA, 1975; pp. 151–170.
62. Kluver, H.; Bucy, P .C. Preliminary analysis of functions of the temporal lobes in monkeys. Arch. Neurol. Psychiatry 1939,
42, 979–1000. [CrossRef]
63. Aggleton, J.P .; Passingham, R. Syndrome produced by lesions of the amygdala in monkeys (Macaca mulatta).J. Comp. Physiol.
Psychol. 1981, 95, 961. [CrossRef]
64. Gabriel, M. Functions of anterior and posterior cingulate cortex during avoidance learning in rabbits. Prog. Brain Res. 1990,
85, 467–483.
65. Goldberg, G. From intent to action: Evolution and function of the premotor systems of the forntal lobe. In The Frontal Lobes
Revisited; Perceman, E., Ed.; The IRBN Press: New York, NY, USA, 1987; pp. 273–306.
66. Shipp, S. The importance of being agranular: A comparative account of visual and motor cortex. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol.
Sci. 2005, 360, 797–814. [CrossRef]
67. Greicius, M.; Supekar, K.; Menon, V .; Dougherty, R. Resting-State Functional Connectivity Reflects Structural Connectivity in the
Default Mode Network. Cereb. Cortex 2008, 19, 72–78. [CrossRef]
68. Yeo, B.; Krienen, F.M.; Sepulcre, J.; Sabuncu, M.R.; Lashkari, D.; Hollinshead, M.; Roffman, J.L.; Smoller, J.W.; Zöllei, L.;
Polimeni, J.R. The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity. J. Neurophysiol. 2011,
106, 1125–1165. [CrossRef]
69. Corbetta, M.; Shulman, G.L. Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven attention in the brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2002,
3, 201–215. [CrossRef]
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 41 of 42
70. Friston, K.; FitzGerald, T.; Rigoli, F.; Schwartenbeck, P .; Pezzulo, G. Active inference and learning.Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 2016,
68, 862–879. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
71. Friston, K.J.; Fagerholm, E.D.; Zarghami, T.S.; Parr, T.; Hipólito, I.; Magrou, L.; Razi, A. Parcels and particles: Markov blankets in
the brain. Netw. Neurosci. 2021, 5, 211–251. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
72. Barbas, H.; Rempel-Clower, N. Cortical structure predicts the pattern of corticocortical connections. Cereb. Cortex 1997, 7, 635–646.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
73. Tucker, D.M.; Williamson, P .A. Asymmetric neural control systems in human self-regulation.Psychol. Rev. 1984, 91, 185–215.
[CrossRef]
74. Mesulam, M. Central cholinergic pathways: Neuroanatomy and some behavioral implications. In Neurotransmitters and Cortical
Function: From Molecules to Mind; Avoli, M., Reader, T.A., Dykes, R.W., Gloor, P ., Eds.; Plenum Press: New York, NY, USA, 1988;
pp. 237–260.
75. Pribram, K.H.; McGuinness, D. Arousal, activation, and effort in the control of attention. Psychol. Rev. 1975, 82, 6–149. [CrossRef]
76. Vogt, B.A.; Pandya, D.N. Cingulate cortex of the rhesus monkey: II. Cortical afferents. J. Comp. Neurol. 1987, 262, 271–289.
[CrossRef]
77. Eidelberg, D.; Galaburda, A.M. Inferior parietal lobule: Divergent architectonic asymmetries in the human brain. Arch. Neurol.
1984, 41, 843–852. [CrossRef]
78. Gerfen, C.R.; Herkenham, M.; Thibault, J. The neostriatal mosaic: II. Patch-and matrix-directed mesostriatal dopaminergic and
non-dopaminergic systems. J. Neurosci. 1987, 7, 3915–3934. [CrossRef]
79. Nauta, W.J. Limbic innervation of the striatum. Adv. Neurol. 1982, 35, 41–47.
80. Berridge, K.C.; Robinson, T.E. Liking, wanting, and the incentive-sensitization theory of addiction. Am. Psychol. 2016, 71, 670.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
81. Nauta, W.J.; Smith, G.P .; Faull, R.L.; Domesick, V .B. Efferent connections and nigral afferents of the nucleus accumbens septi in
the rat. Neuroscience 1978, 3, 385–401. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
82. Puelles, L. Functional implications of the prosomeric model. Biomolecules 2024, 14, 331. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
83. Puelles, L. Thoughts on the development, structure and evolution of the mammalian and avian telencephalic pallium. Philos.
Trans. R. Soc. London. Ser. B Biol. Sci. 2001, 356, 1583–1598. [CrossRef]
84. Luzzati, F. A hypothesis for the evolution of the upper layers of the neocortex through co-option of the olfactory cortex
developmental program. Front. Neurosci. 2015, 9, 162. [CrossRef]
85. Nauta, W.J.H.; Karten, H.J. A general profile of the vertebrate brain, with sidelights on the ancestry of cerebral cortex. In The
Neurosciences; Quarton, G.C., Melnechuck, T., Adelman, G., Eds.; Rockefeller University Press: New York, NY, USA, 1970; pp. 7–26.
86. Born, J.; Wilhelm, I. System consolidation of memory during sleep. Psychol. Res. 2012, 76, 192–203. [CrossRef]
87. Diekelmann, S.; Born, J. The memory function of sleep. Nat. Rev. 2010, 11, 114–126. [CrossRef]
88. Tononi, G.; Cirelli, C. Sleep and the price of plasticity: From synaptic and cellular homeostasis to memory consolidation and
integration. Neuron 2014, 81, 12–34. [CrossRef]
89. Walker, M. Why We Sleep: Unlocking the Power of Sleep and Dreams; Simon and Schuster: New York, NY, USA, 2017.
90. Buzsáki, G. Hippocampal sharp wave-ripple: A cognitive biomarker for episodic memory and planning. Hippocampus 2015, 25,
1073–1188. [CrossRef]
91. Narikiyo, K.; Mizuguchi, R.; Ajima, A.; Shiozaki, M.; Hamanaka, H.; Johansen, J.P .; Mori, K.; Yoshihara, Y. The claustrum
coordinates cortical slow-wave activity. Nat. Neurosci. 2020, 23, 741–753. [CrossRef]
92. Tononi, G.; Cirelli, C. Sleep and synaptic homeostasis: A hypothesis. Brain Res. Bull. 2003, 62, 143–150. [CrossRef]
93. Grossberg, S. How does a brain build a cognitive code? Psychol. Rev. 1980, 87, 1–51. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
94. Luppi, P .-H.; Billwiller, F.; Fort, P . Selective activation of a few limbic structures during paradoxical (REM) sleep by the claustrum
and the supramammillary nucleus: Evidence and function. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 2017, 44, 59–64. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
95. Brown, R.E.; Basheer, R.; McKenna, J.T.; Strecker, R.E.; McCarley, R.W. Control of sleep and wakefulness. Physiol. Rev. 2012,
92, 1087–1187. [CrossRef]
96. Miller, R. Cortico-hippocampal interplay: Self-organizing phase-locked loops for indexing memory. Psychobiology 1989, 17, 115–
128. [CrossRef]
97. Hinton, G.E.; Dayan, P .; Frey, B.J.; Neal, R.M. The “wake-sleep” algorithm for unsupervised neural networks. Science 1995,
268, 1158–1161. [CrossRef]
98. Kandel, E.R.; Schwartz, J.H.; Jessell, T.M.; Siegelbaum, S.; Hudspeth, A.J.; Mack, S. Principles of Neural Science; McGraw-hill: New
York, NY, USA, 2000; Volume 4.
99. Munoz, M.A. Colloquium: Criticality and dynamical scaling in living systems. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2018, 90, 031001. [CrossRef]
100. Chialvo, D.R. Emergent complex neural dynamics. Nat. Phys. 2010, 6, 744–750. [CrossRef]
101. Hesse, J.; Gross, T. Self-organized criticality as a fundamental property of neural systems. Front. Syst. Neurosci. 2014, 8, 166.
[CrossRef]
Entropy 2025, 27, 829 42 of 42
102. Beggs, J.M.; Plenz, D. Neuronal avalanches in neocortical circuits. J. Neurosci. 2003, 23, 11167–11177. [CrossRef]
103. Tsodyks, M.V .; Sejnowski, T. Rapid state switching in balanced cortical network models.Netw. Comput. Neural Syst. 1995, 6, 111.
[CrossRef]
104. Friston, K.; Kiebel, S. Predictive coding under the free-energy principle. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 2009, 364, 1211–1221.
[CrossRef]
105. Friston, K. The free-energy principle: A unified brain theory? Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2010, 11, 127–138. [CrossRef]
106. Hering, E. Über das Gedächtnis als Eine Allgemeine Funktion der Organisierten Materie: Vortrag Gehalten in der Feierlichen Sitzung der
Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien am XXX. Mai MDCCCLXX; Wilhelm Engelmann: Leipzig, Germany, 1912.
107. Zeidman, P .; Friston, K.; Parr, T. A primer on Variational Laplace (VL).NeuroImage 2023, 279, 120310. [CrossRef]
108. Fountas, Z.; Sylaidi, A.; Nikiforou, K.; Seth, A.K.; Shanahan, M.; Roseboom, W. A predictive processing model of episodic memory
and time perception. Neural Comput. 2022, 34, 1501–1544. [CrossRef]
109. Werner, H. The Comparative Psychology of Mental Development; Harper: New York, NY, USA, 1957.
110. Dehaene, S. Consciousness and the Brain: Deciphering How the Brain Codes Our Thoughts; Viking: New York, NY, USA, 2014.
111. Müller, P .M.; Miron, G.; Holtkamp, M.; Meisel, C. Critical dynamics predicts cognitive performance and provides a common
framework for heterogeneous mechanisms impacting cognition. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2025, 122, e2417117122. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
112. Isen, A.M. Positive affect, cognitive processes, and social behavior. Adv. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 1987, 20, 203–253.
113. Tucker, D.M. Mind From Body: Experience From Neural Structure; Oxford University Press: New York, NY, USA, 2007.
114. Hobson, J.A.; Friston, K.J. Waking and dreaming consciousness: Neurobiological and functional considerations. Prog. Neurobiol.
2012, 98, 82–98. [CrossRef]
115. Brown, J. Microstructure of perception. Cogn. Brain Theory 1983, 6, 145–184.
116. Tognoli, E.; Kelso, J.A.S. The Metastable Brain. Neuron 2014, 81, 35–48. [CrossRef]
117. Piaget, J. The Origins of Intelligence in Children; International Universities Press: New York, NY, USA, 1936.
118. Piaget, J. Genetic Epistemology; W. W. Norton & Company: New York, NY, USA, 1971.
119. Axmacher, N.; Mormann, F.; Fernández, G.; Elger, C.E.; Fell, J. Memory formation by neuronal synchronization.Brain Res. Rev.
2006, 52, 170–182. [CrossRef]
120. Canolty, R.T.; Edwards, E.; Dalal, S.S.; Soltani, M.; Nagarajan, S.S.; Kirsch, H.E.; Berger, M.S.; Barbaro, N.M.; Knight, R.T. High
gamma power is phase-locked to theta oscillations in human neocortex. Science 2006, 313, 1626–1628. [CrossRef]
121. Engel, A.K.; Fries, P . Beta-band oscillations—Signalling the status quo? Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 2010, 20, 156–165. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
122. Hobson, J. The AIM Model of Dreaming, Sleeping, and Waking Consciousness; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2009.
123. Comrie, A.E.; Frank, L.M.; Kay, K. Imagination as a fundamental function of the hippocampus. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B 2022, 377,
20210336. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
124. Ellamil, M.; Dobson, C.; Beeman, M.; Christoff, K. Evaluative and generative modes of thought during the creative process.
Neuroimage 2012, 59, 1783–1794. [CrossRef]
125. Graybiel, A.M.; Matsushima, A. Striosomes and Matrisomes: Scaffolds for Dynamic Coupling of Volition and Action. Annu. Rev.
Neurosci. 2023, 46, 359–380. [CrossRef]
126. Meunier, D.; Lambiotte, R.; Fornito, A.; Ersche, K.; Bullmore, E.T. Hierarchical modularity in human brain functional networks.
Front. Neuroinform. 2009, 3, 571. [CrossRef]
127. Alemdar, E.; Poznanski, R.; Cacha, L.; Leisman, G.; Brändas, E.J. New insights into holonomic brain theory: Implications for
active consciousness. J. Multiscale Neurosci. 2023, 2, 159–168. [CrossRef]
128. Sbitnev, V . The edge of chaos is that where consciousness manifests itself through intermittent dynamics. Acad. Biol. 2024, 2.
[CrossRef]
129. Hall, C.; Van de Castle, R. The Content Analysis of Dreams; Appleton-Century-Crofts: New York, NY, USA, 1966.
130. Pace-Schott, E.F.; Seo, J.; Bottary, R. The influence of sleep on fear extinction in trauma-related disorders. Neurobiol. Stress 2023, 22,
100500. [CrossRef]
131. Zeithamova, D.; Bowmana, C.R. Generalization and the hippocampus: More than one story? Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 2020, 175,
107317. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
132. Gendlin, E.T. Experiencing and the Creation of Meaning: A Philosophical and Psychological Approach to the Subjective; Northwestern
University Press: Evanston, IL, USA, 1997.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.