CaNada WatCh  •  SPRiNg 2009 59
US energy strategy and the obama 
presidency: Not quite the expected U-turn
B
ased on President Barack Obama’s 
campaign energy proposal, certain 
changes can be foreseen in US energy 
policy. There will also be important inter-
national repercussions as the policy 
aims at transitioning toward alternative 
fuel sources and efficiency in fuel usage. 
These hold promise for extricating the 
US economy from the crushing financial 
crisis and unprecedented economic 
recession it is in. Obama’s energy policy 
announces a break with America’s cur -
rent practices and incorporates new 
elements that, together with security 
goals, will have a direct impact on the 
energy policies of its two neighbours, 
Canada and Mexico.
a SMaRt StRatEgY
Although the United States has histori -
cally made attempts at energy self-suffi -
ciency, the proposals were difficult to put 
into practice. Energy policies proposed 
by previous administrations emphasized 
the diversification of the supply sources 
geographically, rather than a drastic 
reduction in energy consumption. Theo-
retically, these proposals relied on mak-
ing a distinction between the idea of 
energy vulnerability and the idea of 
dependence—that is to say, “America 
can be dependent but not necessarily 
vulnerable.” This approach supported 
increased and diversified oil imports as 
the cheapest and, strategically, the best 
alternative, although it became one of 
the biggest items on the commercial 
trade balance and 3 percent of the 
national GDP .
As 2009 begins, one of the central 
objectives of Obama’s energy proposal 
is to confront the problem of energy 
dependence by reducing, over the next 
ten years, the auto industry’s consump -
tion of oil imports from the Middle East 
and Venezuela. With the transportation 
sector comprising 69 percent of national 
consumption, improving gas efficiency 
in the auto industry will allow for a reduc-
tion in imports. Climate change is another 
key issue in Obama’s energy proposal. 
The United States seeks to become the 
leader in the design and development of 
a post-Kyoto regime, which would come 
into effect in 2012 when the current pro-
tocol ends. Not only do these efforts 
respond to Obama’s personal convic -
tions about the environment, they also 
involve the consideration that it is import-
ant for the United States to be seen as a 
leader in this key policy domain.
The proposal advocates caps on US 
greenhouse gas emissions to ensure they 
are 80 percent lower than 1999 levels by 
2050. It is strategically significant for 
Obama to take up the cause of climate 
change because this is now a central part 
of the energy security policies in many 
countries and is associated with the 
transition toward alternative energy 
sources. Taking a leadership role in this 
field will allow the United States to create 
the market opportunities that will posi -
tion American technologies well in other 
markets. Efforts in this field will be 
accomplished by linking up with the UN 
Framework Convention on Climate 
Change. Obama’s proposal also seeks 
to improve efficiency and accelerate the 
advancement of low-carbon-content 
emissions technologies; so by attempt -
ing to construct a new international 
regime for climate change, the new 
president’s proposal will have global 
repercussions.
thE StRatEgY iN thE  
doMEStiC SPhERE
In a kind of neo-Keynesian proposal that 
supports auto and energy—two of the 
most important sectors of the economy—
Obama’s strategy will earmark US$20 
billion approved by the US Congress on 
February 18, 2009 to speed up the pro -
duction and sale of hybrid cars, promote 
the development and commercialization 
of renewable fuels, encourage energy 
efficiency, reduce coal-powered electric 
plant emissions, stimulate the production 
of second-generation biofuels, and begin 
the transition to a digital electricity grid. 
Despite the fact that the size of the invest-
ment is small, given the magnitude of the 
effort required to transition toward other 
energy sources, the effort is commend -
able.
For the moment, the first steps have 
been taken on a legislative level. A large 
market is developing for renewable 
energy projects, starting with the emer -
gence of requirements around renew -
able portfolio standards for electricity 
generation. Also, state and municipal 
governments, hospitals, and universities 
are offered tax breaks to encourage 
them to acquire renewable energy 
assets, and alternative public and private 
financing for this is being explored. On 
October 3, 2008, a law was passed giving 
a 30 percent federal tax credit to anyone 
investing in solar installations, with the 
BY RoSío VaRgaS
Rosío Vargas is a researcher at  
the Centre for Research on  
North america at the Universidad  
Nacional autónoma de México.
although the 
United States has 
historically made 
attempts at energy 
self-sufficiency, the 
proposals were 
difficult to put into 
practice.
US energy strategy, page 60
60 CaNada WatCh  •  SPRiNg 2009
aim of making the United States the 
world’s largest market. On an inter -
national level, the impact of Obama’s 
strategy and the efforts begun by the 
outgoing Bush administration together 
with the G8 will be important because 
they aim to place renewable energy 
technology mainly in developing nations 
using market criteria.
Unfortunately, in contrast to the Kyoto 
Protocol, the proposals being made now 
and the commitment to reduce emis -
sions are voluntary, not mandatory. This 
raises an important concern: previous 
experience has shown that effective 
emissions reduction will fail if goals are 
not mandatory.
The efficient use of fuels is another 
option for reducing US oil dependency 
that at the same time contributes to sup-
port sectors in economic trouble like the 
auto industry. This will be achieved with 
the injection of approximately US$4 bil-
lion in tax credits and guaranteed loans 
to ensure that the vehicles—one million 
electric hybrid vehicles by 2015—will be 
produced in the United States.
thE iMPaCt oN NEighBoURS
Undoubtedly, these proposals will have 
important implications for the whole 
world and particularly for the United 
States’ neighbours. Reducing US depen-
dency on Mideast oil would certainly 
alter the strategic importance of this area 
to the West. Although the proposals do 
not outline a specific role for western 
hemisphere suppliers, and particularly 
Canada and Mexico, clearly their role 
will be fundamental because of geopoli-
tics. They are “trustworthy” suppliers 
able to guarantee US energy security. 
Canada and Mexico can also further the 
United States’ interest in reducing depen-
dency on Venezuela, which is starting to 
move its crude to the Chinese market.
Canada contributes mightily to US 
energy security by the Alberta tar sands 
deposits and natural gas exports. Fifteen 
percent of US oil imports are sourced 
from Canada. Mexico will maximize oil 
production and, as a consequence, 
maintain its exportation levels to the US 
market under the Mexican energy 
reforms passed in October 2008 by 
incorporating multinational corporations 
and international service providers. 
Since little can be expected in the way 
of increased US oil production, given 
Obama’s commitment to protect environ-
mentally sensitive areas like the Arctic 
National Wildlife Refuge from productive 
activities, Canada and Mexico will con -
tinue to be strategically critical to the 
United States for increasing regional 
energy supply not only in fossil-based 
energy but in other areas as well.
Energy integration under US leader -
ship will be broadened to include the 
enlargement of the Canadian and Ameri-
Reducing US dependency on Mideast oil 
would certainly alter the strategic importance 
of this area to the West.
can electricity markets, the construction 
of re-gasification plants (NLG) in Mex -
ico, the re-exportation of liquid natural 
gas to the US market from Canada, and 
the development of ethanol plants in 
Mexico, Central America, and the Carib-
bean to export to the United States. All 
this will happen in a regional context that 
promises a gradual transition to other 
sources of energy. In the case of Mexico, 
this will mean constant pressure to priva-
tize and deregulate the state-owned 
companies (PEMEX and CFE) in order 
to create more space for multinational 
corporations, especially from Spain, 
Great Britain, and the United States, in 
renewable fuels, natural gas, and oil. 
Whether this will come to pass remains 
to be seen. 
US energy strategy continued from page 59
Portal for North america
Portal for North America is a unique web-based tool for knowledge 
exchange within Canada, Mexico, and the United States  . Built by 
the Centre for International Governance Innovation (www  .cigionline .
org), it provides freely accessible avenues for research, education, 
and network-building on critical continental issues  . 
Main objectives include:
• providing open access to the most comprehensive resources 
for research and analysis on interaction between Canada, 
Mexico, and the United States;
• developing and promoting educational resources for 
increased continental studies; and
• establishing and fostering a network of scholars, 
policymakers, practitioners, and students who are interested 
in North American governance issues  .
Visit the Portal for North america at
www.portalfornorthamerica.org