fpsyg-12-543076 January 29, 2021 Time: 11:31 # 1
PERSPECTIVE
published: 29 January 2021
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.543076
Edited by:
Leon De Bruin,
Radboud University Nijmegen,
Netherlands
Reviewed by:
Gunnar Declerck,
University of Technology Compiegne,
France
Michael David Kirchhoff,
University of Wollongong, Australia
*Correspondence:
Elmarie Venter
elmarie.venter@rub.de;
elmarie.venter@ruhr-uni-bochum.de
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Theoretical and Philosophical
Psychology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 24 March 2020
Accepted: 12 January 2021
Published: 29 January 2021
Citation:
Venter E (2021) Toward an
Embodied, Embedded Predictive
Processing Account.
Front. Psychol. 12:543076.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.543076
Toward an Embodied, Embedded
Predictive Processing Account
Elmarie Venter*
Institute for Philosophy II, Ruhr University Bochum, Bochum, Germany
In this paper, I argue for an embodied, embedded approach to predictive processing
and thus align the framework with situated cognition. The recent popularity of theories
conceiving of the brain as a predictive organ has given rise to two broad camps in the
literature that I call free energy enactivism and cognitivist predictive processing. The
two approaches vary in scope and methodology. The scope of cognitivist predictive
processing is narrow and restricts cognition to brain processes and structures; it does
not consider the body-beyond-brain and the environment as constituents of cognitive
processes. Free energy enactivism, on the other hand, includes all self-organizing
systems that minimize free energy (including non-living systems) and thus does not
offer any unique explanations for more complex cognitive phenomena that are unique
to human cognition. Furthermore, because of its strong commitment to the mind-
life continuity thesis, it does not provide an explanation of what distinguishes more
sophisticated cognitive systems from simple systems. The account that I develop in
this paper rejects both of these radical extremes. Instead, I propose a compromise
that highlights the necessary components of predictive processing by making use
of a mechanistic methodology of explanation. The starting point of the argument
in this paper is that despite the interchangeable use of the terms, prediction error
minimization and the free energy principle are not identical. But this distinction does
not need to disrupt the status quo of the literature if we consider an alternative
approach: Embodied, Embedded Predictive Processing (EEPP). EEPP accommodates
the free energy principle, as argued for by free energy enactivism, but it also allows
for mental representations in its explanation of cognition. Furthermore, EEPP explains
how prediction error minimization is realized but, unlike cognitivist PP , it allocates
a constitutive role to the body in cognition. Despite highlighting concerns regarding
cognitivist PP , I do not wish to discredit the role of the neural domain or representations
as free energy enactivism does. Neural structures and processes undeniably contribute
to the minimization of prediction error but the role of the body is equally important.
On my account, prediction error minimization and free energy minimization are deeply
dependent on the body of an agent, such that the body-beyond-brain plays a
constitutive role in cognitive processing. I suggest that the body plays three constitutive
roles in prediction error minimization: The bodyregulates cognitive activity, ensuring that
cognition and action are intricately linked. The body acts as distributor in the sense that
it carries some of the cognitive load by fulﬁlling the function of minimizing prediction
error. Finally, the body serves toconstrain the information that is processed by an agent.
In fulﬁlling these three roles, the agent and environment enter into a bidirectional relation
through inﬂuencing and modeling the structure of the other. This connects EEPP to the
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 1 January 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 543076
fpsyg-12-543076 January 29, 2021 Time: 11:31 # 2
Venter Embodied, Embedded Predictive Processing
free energy principle because the whole embodied agent minimizes free energy in virtue
of being a model of its econiche. This grants the body a constitutive role as part of the
collection of mechanisms that minimize prediction error and free energy. The body can
only fulﬁll its role when embedded in an environment, of which it is a model. In this sense,
EEPP offers the most promising alternative to cognitivist predictive processing and free
energy enactivism.
Keywords: predictive processing, embodiment, mechanistic explanation, free energy, prediction error
INTRODUCTION
This paper defends an embodied approach to the predictive
processing framework that is aligned with the broader setting of
situated cognition. Inspired by principles in biological sciences
and computer sciences, the predictive processing framework
(henceforth, PP) has gained much popularity in cognitive science
in recent years. This account of cognition turns the traditional
account of cognition upside down: instead of the brain gathering
information about the world, processing information, and then
employing it in the output of action, the brain is constantly
making predictions about the world. The account has been
applied to explain a variety of processes in the brain, and aims
to provide a unifying perspective of perception, action and
cognition. This is agreed upon by most researchers in the ﬁeld but
the exact relationship between perception, action and cognition
remains a contested topic in the literature on PP (Colombo and
Wright, 2016). The surprising number of varied interpretations
of PP may lead one to question whether they, in fact, refer
to the same idea. The aim of this paper is to investigate this
question and oﬀer an embodied approach to PP (Clark, 2016;
Kirchhoﬀ, 2017, 2018; Kirchhoﬀ and Kiverstein, 2019). I do
this by diﬀerentiating between two popular interpretations—
cognitivist PP and free energy enactivism—and then carving out
an account most compatible with a strong embodied account
of cognition. I take strong embodiment to mean that both
neural structures and wider bodily structures constitute cognitive
processes insofar as the body not only contributes to (or enables)
the function of the predictive system (to minimize prediction
error) but also directly fulﬁlls this function without mediation
by mental representations (Shapiro, 2004; Rowlands, 2010).
This is contrasted with weaker embodiment claims which take
cognitive processes to be dependent (to varying degrees) on
bodily structures and processes (Rupert, 2009; Alsmith and de
Vignemont, 2012).
The paper is organized as follows. I brieﬂy describe the
grounding principles of PP and focus on highlighting the
distinction between the free energy principle and prediction error
minimization1. The free energy principle sets out to explain
1The divorce of the free energy principle from predictive processing is becoming
more popular and several recent papers argue for such a separation. Hohwy (2020),
for example, argues that the free energy principle oﬀers a normative theory that is a
mathematical and conceptual analysis whereas predictive processing is a falsiﬁable
process-theory. Bruineberg et al. (2018) also argue for a conceptual distinction
between free energy minimization and prediction error minimization. Although
they also propose that the two concepts are incompatible whereas Hohwy and
myself do not.
all mind and life, and is typically applied to explaining why
dynamic systems avoid disorder or dispersal (Friston, 2013a;
Sims, 2016). Given the wide scope of the free energy principle,
I set out to narrow down the discussion to the cognitive domain
by presenting the relevant features of PP in terms of prediction
error minimization. I then investigate two interpretations of PP:
cognitivist PP leans toward a commitment to internalism, and
free energy enactivism undertakes the task to explain dynamic,
coupled engagement with the world. After critically examining
the scope and explanatory ambitions of these two interpretations,
I defend a mechanistic explanation of PP and use this as a
starting point to develop an embodied account of PP. On the
mechanistic approach, all components of the system that realize
the function of the system are important and must be included in
the explanation. Following this, I argue that the body be granted
a strong constitutive role in an explanation of cognition because
it fulﬁlls the function of prediction error minimization without
necessarily being mediated by mental representations.
SETTING THE SCENE
The objective of this section is to provide a bird’s eye view of
the necessary features of predictive processing (PP). This section
is intentionally vague given that more speciﬁc features will be
discussed in the subsequent sections. What I wish to highlight is
the distinction between the free energy principle and prediction
error minimization. Though the two concepts are diﬃcult to
separate and often used interchangeably in the literature, they
make diﬀerent predictions and vary in scope and application
(Bruineberg et al., 2018; Hohwy, 2020). Any description of PP
starts with an understanding of the free energy principle which
is deﬁned as follows: “any self-organizing system that is at
equilibrium with its environment must minimize free energy”
(Friston, 2010) where free energy refers to a state associated
with disorder or uncertainty. The principle is based on the fact
that biological systems have a limited range of states in which
they can survive. It is therefore necessary for an organism to
maintain itself within its possible range of states by minimizing
disorder and uncertainty; failure to do so leads to dispersal and
ultimately death. The idea upon which PP is build is that in
order for a system to maintain itself within a particular range
of states, it requires the capacity to predict future states. In
sophisticated systems, like human agents, this means tracking
and representing the causes of sensory states. This process is
realized by generative models with diﬀerent sets of priors about
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 2 January 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 543076
fpsyg-12-543076 January 29, 2021 Time: 11:31 # 3
Venter Embodied, Embedded Predictive Processing
the environment and the agent. The primary function of these
generative models is to maintain a set of hypotheses about
the world that generates the most accurate predictions of the
incoming information and consequently minimize uncertainty
about the environment (free energy). Free energy is evaluated
using two factors: an agent’s sensory states and a recognition
density (i.e., the aforementioned probabilistic representation of
the hidden causes of sensory states) (Friston, 2010). Free energy
minimization is a principle of optimization that can be applied
at many diﬀerent levels of analysis and at diﬀerent timescales,
explaining how we maintain bodily states such as, for example,
blood sugar levels (Seth, 2013) to how we maintain an optimal
narrative model of ourselves (Hohwy and Michael, 2017), and
even explaining social cognition by means of interoceptive
inference (Fotopoulou and Tsakiris, 2017). The use of “generative
model” is cautiously applied and does not necessarily imply
contentful representation because it can be applied beyond the
neural domain. When the free energy principle is applied to
the neural domain, the amount of free energy is calculated
as the sum of all prediction error which is deﬁned as the
divergence between the probability distribution encoding the
sensory states and the recognition density. It is interpreted
as the mismatch between what is predicted and the incoming
sensory stimuli.
In the neural domain, PP is deﬁned by the idea that processing
stimuli is driven by top-down processes. This is commonly
referred to as prediction error minimization (Hohwy, 2013). To
see a structured world is to use existing generative models of
the world to shape a virtual version of sensory perturbations
from the top down. Thus rather than reconstructing the world,
the system is “constantly trying to guess the present ” (Clark,
2017b p. 727, emphasis in original). Generative models are
constantly updated so that the best possible top-down predictions
are generated to meet bottom-up transmissions. Better top-
down predictions mean that more incoming information is
matched and explained away (which results in less uncertainty).
The process of “explaining away” incoming information leaves
only prediction error to be propagated within the system. This
bidirectional process occurs at diﬀerent spatial and temporal
scales operating at many diﬀerent levels of a processing hierarchy
where, at each level, the system is trying to predict its own
sensory states. The important feature in this schema is interaction
between the diﬀerent levels, where higher level predictions
involve more abstract and temporally extended states and lower-
level predictions process more ﬁne-grained states, such as lines,
edges and textures of surfaces. The predictions that pervasively
determine perceptual experiences are extracted from higher levels
and prior knowledge based on statistical estimation. Statistical
estimation refers to a calculation of accuracy and precision
within a range of likely and probable predictions that explain
sensory causes. The function of the whole system is for top-
down predictions to meet the incoming signals and become more
successful at making predictions about the world. Estimates at
each level in the hierarchy are also predictive of each other in
order to assist with the successful execution of this function.
Thus, prediction is not just from one level to the next but also
occurs between models at a single level. This strategy is eﬃcient in
that it minimizes computing power because mismatches between
top-down and bottom-up information only update generative
models which already exist (Metzinger and Wiese, 2017).
Prediction error minimization is the main objective of the
system (the brain is commonly the system referred to in this
context). Predictions can be accurate or inaccurate to varying
degrees. There is a direct correlation between the accuracy
of a prediction and how well ﬁtted a generative model is in
that an accurate prediction is an indication of a successful
generative model. If the prediction is accurate, nothing more
needs to be done and the generative model is accurate with
respect to the state of the world. If bottom-up signals are not
accurately predicted, the mismatched information is transmitted
as prediction error until the model (more or less) matches
the state of the world. Prediction error can be minimized in
two ways: perceptual inference and active inference. Perceptual
inference involves model revision based on prediction errors.
Prediction errors are transmitted up the hierarchy and the
generative model is updated. Active inference is a process in
which the agent acts upon, or changes, the world in order to
bring about the state of the world predicted by the current best
generative model. It can be argued that active inference can
be explained in entirely internalist terms insofar as predictions
about bodily movements and its causes on the environment is
an inferential process. Cognitivist PP is committed to the view
that active inference is a result of “the sensorimotor system
passing predictions of proprioceptive input to the classic reﬂex
arcs, which fulﬁll them and thereby cause action” (Hohwy,
2016, p. 262). I reject this view and will develop an account on
which active inference is construed as direct (not inferentially
mediated) engagement with the environment (Bruineberg et al.,
2018; Kiverstein, 2018). On this view, perceptual and active
inference are intricately linked rather than one being in the
service of the other. Active inference captures the action-
oriented nature of PP which enables predictive control and
has the positive eﬀect of enabling an agent to act in order
to regulate vital parameters. Importantly, it is the aim of
the system to exercise predictive control by deciding which
strategy to use for successful prediction error minimization in
the long run. If the system always adapts to signals regardless
of how noisy and uncertain they are, it runs the risk of
overﬁtting the generative models—making it unreliable as a
way to structure the world. On the other hand, not adapting
the models when prediction error is propagated upwards,
runs the risk of underﬁtting the model. The need to explore
the environment and seek sensory information then becomes
redundant. It is therefore important for the system to strike a
delicate balance between changing the model and its parameters,
on the one hand, and maintaining the parameters and changing
the incoming signals.
The features discussed in this section form the foundation for
an understanding of PP in terms of prediction error minimization
as it is derived from the free energy principle. These features
are interpreted in various ways and are highlighted to various
degrees. I discuss two interpretations of predictive processing
before developing the EEPP account. The ﬁrst interpretation, I
call cognitivist PP. This account is spearheaded by Jakob Hohwy
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 3 January 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 543076
fpsyg-12-543076 January 29, 2021 Time: 11:31 # 4
Venter Embodied, Embedded Predictive Processing
who refers to his account as prediction error minimization; it
is also referred to as “conservative predictive processing” by
Clark (2015). I refrain from using Hohwy’s terminology to avoid
confusion given that my own account makes use of prediction
error minimization as a function but does not restrict this
function to the neural domain. On Clark’s terminology, my
account would also be understood as conservative given that
I do not propose to discard the notion of representation. But
I grant a constitutive role to the body so I set my account
apart from an internalist, cognitivist interpretation of PP. The
second interpretation that I discuss arises from a combination
of radically enactive cognition (REC) and “radical predictive
processing” Clark (2015). I call this free energy enactivism to
highlight the ampliﬁed role of the free energy principle in
cognitive processing.
COGNITIVIST PREDICTIVE PROCESSING
The cognitivist interpretation of predictive processing builds
on the features discussed above and construes the brain as a
prediction error minimization system. Prediction errors signal
the mismatches between bottom-up sensory signals and multi-
area, top-down ﬂows of neuronal activity (Clark, 2017b, p. 727,
my emphasis) which serve to reconstruct the external reality.
This process requires that the mind is an independent system
that processes information entering from the outside world,
reconstructing and mirroring the world for the agent to interact
with. Anything that requires us to interact with it must be
modeled. This distinction between mind and world enforces a
strong and rigid evidentiary boundary between what happens
in the external world and the generative models in the brain.
In this sense, cognitive processes are inferentially secluded and
neurocentrically skull bound (Hohwy, 2016, p. 259). Thus, any
inputs beyond the sensory organs are outside the evidentiary
boundary and can only be reconstructed (represented) in the
brain. Hohwy (2016) epistemically decouples the brain from the
body and world by suggesting that the brain, in implementing
prediction error minimization, is self-evidencing. The brain has a
model of the environment in which it is found and is continually
updating generative models or changing input. It is equipped
with the task of explaining away sensory input and, in doing so,
it generates evidence for its own existence. This does not depict
the brain as a passive organ; instead the brain is actively sampling
evidence that matches its predictions and exploits the body as a
tool in this undertaking. Perception is a process of representation
only realized in the brain that infers distal information based
on “partial and fragmentary information available in the sensory
signal” (Clark, 2017b, p. 729). Our access to the world is bounded
by prediction error minimization.
On this approach, action is explained in terms of
proprioceptive prediction in that the approach construes
action as a result of the brain’s predictions about what state
the body should be in (Friston and Stephan (2007), Friston
(2010), and Hohwy (2016)). Action is an inferential process that
starts in the neural domain and then “the body as it were goes
away and does its own thing until the predictions come true”
(Hohwy, 2016, p. 276). On the cognitivist PP approach, having
embodied access to the world is not a necessary condition of
the prediction error minimization system—it just so happens
that we have bodies and therefore action is more likely (Hohwy,
2018, p. 135). Thus, predictive control is not explained in terms
of agentive access to the world, or coupling between agent
and environment, but rather in terms of the brain selectively
sampling the sensory evidence presented to it (Burr and Jones,
2016). The brain is in the spotlight and the body in itself
plays no constitutive role because “the mind begins where
sensory input is delivered through exteroceptive, proprioceptive,
and interoceptive receptors and it ends where proprioceptive
predictions are delivered, mainly in the spinal cord” (Hohwy,
2016, p. 276). On this view, the body is important only insofar
as it is represented in the neural hierarchy. Neural populations
transmit commands for action based on sensory input. There is
no direct access and engagement with the real world.
A notable implication of cognitivist PP is that the mind can be
explained in entirely “internalist, solipsistic terms, throwing away
the body, the world, and other people” (Hohwy, 2016, p. 265). The
scope of cognitivist PP is thus limited to the brain, and all other
phenomena (including the body and tools in the environment)
only serve as resources to fulﬁll the function of prediction error
minimization. Prediction error can be minimized using two
strategies: (1) changing sensory input through action or (2)
changing the internal models of the world. On the cognitivist PP
account, both these strategies are explained as occuring primarily
within the bounds of the skull. All processes relating to the
agent are cashed out in terms of what happens in the cortical
hierarchy. Action is enslaved in service of the brain and parts
of our own bodies that are not functionally sensory organs are
not constituents of cognitive states (Hohwy, 2016, p. 269). Bodily
movements, as well as processes such as heart rate, are all inferred
processes, lying beyond the evidentiary boundary. Construing the
body as just another cause in the environment implies that it is
nothing special, and neither is representation thereof (Hohwy
and Michael, 2017). Although bodily movement is understood
as facilitating prediction error minimization, and thus still a key
feature in the cognitivist PP account, the role of the body is largely
underplayed. Bodily movement is understood as an inferential
process that arises from reconstructing the world rather than as
enabled by sensory co-ordination.
Cognitivist PP does not grant the body any constitutive role in
cognition. This is a symptom of the account taking a functionalist
approach to explanation and limiting the function of prediction
error minimization to the brain. The primary function of the
brain, on this approach, is to minimize prediction error and
all other phenomena serve only as tools to fulﬁll this function
and are not explanatorily valuable in themselves. Hohwy (2015)
sees value in a functionalist explanation because, he proposes,
it provides a unifying principle for understanding what the
brain does. Perception, for example, is speciﬁed in terms of
a particular function—generating the best possible model of
what is observed—then broken down into further sub-capacities
such as estimating precision and ﬁtting statistical models. These
sub-capacities are then organized in a way that realizes the
overall function of the capacity to be explained. Consider a
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 4 January 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 543076
fpsyg-12-543076 January 29, 2021 Time: 11:31 # 5
Venter Embodied, Embedded Predictive Processing
non-biological example of functional explanation: assembly line
production (Cummins, 2000). In an assembly line, workers are
assigned a task and the ﬁnal product is successfully produced
because each station has fulﬁlled their assigned function. The
entire system can successfully fulﬁll its overall, uniﬁed function
(producing a product) because each station fulﬁlled its given tasks
in an organized way. An assembly line can be explained without
making reference to the product being produced, the factory in
which it is produced, and the number of stations involved in
production. Similarly, a functional analysis limiting prediction
error minimization to the brain does not make reference to
the whole system that realizes the function but only to the
function itself. Hohwy (2015, p. 17) acknowledges the problem
of realization, and that a system has certain kinds of mechanisms
that realize the function but limits talk of realization to neuronal
circuitry. This approach is paradigmatic pure functionalism
which is strongly committed to explaining only the functional
role of a phenomenon and not how it is realized (Cummins,
2000; Egan, 2018). Although this can provide much insight into
why the brain processes information in the way it does, and
why we interact with the world in particular ways, the account
leaves much desired in terms of explaining how prediction error
minimization is realized. Providing an account of the “how”
would require consideration of all components of the system
including, I argue, the constitutive role of the body. In the next
section, I discuss free energy enactivism which grants the body
a central role in its explanations but at the cost of blurring
the boundaries between what is understood as being cognitive
and what is not.
FREE ENERGY ENACTIVISM
The fundamentally active and world-involving nature of
predictive processing (PP) oﬀers a point of agreement with
enactivism. But despite the central role of action for cognition
in PP , a tension arises because the PP framework does not
seem to be complete without appeal to generative models that
require contentful representations. Radically enactive cognition
(REC) suggests that basic (i.e., not mediated by or involving
language) cognition is contentless and non-representational
(Hutto and Myin, 2013, 2017) and since PP is grounded in the
manipulation of representational contents, the two accounts are
in tension. REC outright rejects the cognitivist interpretation of
PP and even a more “radical” version of PP that posits action-
oriented representations. REC’s objection is that any account
that appeals to representations in its explanation must deal
with the hard problem of content which involves explaining
where the brain gets its conceptual resources from to represent
information and make inferences (Hutto, 2018). According to
REC, no acceptable answer has been oﬀered by proponents of PP.
Hutto (2018, p. 21) suggests that prediction error minimization
can be explained in terms of embodied anticipations that are
“grounded in structural and functional neural and other changes
wrought through an organism’s history of interactions.” This
implies that our actions and experiences change our neural setup
not in terms of neural representations but rather in that the
neural domain is “set up to be set oﬀ ” (Prinz, 2004, p. 55).
Thus, information processing is not the same as energy transfer
or electrical activity in the brain but rather information-as-
covariance (Hutto, 2018, p. 22). But the account oﬀered by
REC leaves much to be desired in that it does not provide
a positive proposal about how else we could cash out the
idea that the predictive system harbors generative models, that
something or other is expected or predicted, and that there
are matches or mismatches between top-down predictions and
bottom-up signals.
Building on the same foundations as radical enactivism,
another radical interpretation of PP has been developed in
the literature; I call this interpretation free energy enactivism.
Free energy enactivism, unlike cognitivist PP , proposes that the
free energy principle and the inferential account of perception
and cognition are conceptually independent (Bruineberg et al.,
2018). The free energy enactivist approach maintains that the
dynamic coupling between organism and world suﬃces to
explain cognition and thus the notion of inference in the brain is
not required. The premise for the free energy principle providing
an account of cognition is that free energy is a function of
sensory states and the internal dynamics of a biological system.
This function is extended to the whole embodied organism, and
not limited to reconstructing the structure of the environment
in terms of representations. Instead, it is self-maintaining
processes that endow an agent with a lived perspective and any
disequilibrium shapes the way in which the world is perceived
(Bruineberg et al., 2018, p. 2,426). Perception, on this view, is
a result of the agent being open and responsive to aﬀordances
based on its metabolic and thermal disequilibria. Free energy
enactivism thus understands perception as worthless without
reference to action.
Free energy enactivism aims to provide an account that
uniﬁes biology and cognitive science. One of the radical claims
put forward by free energy enactivism is that “the free energy
principle applies not just to humans but to all living systems,
including the simplest of life forms such as bacteria” (Bruineberg
et al., 2018, p. 2,419). The principle has also been applied to
plant cognition suggesting that plants predict the environmental
factors that cause sensory stimulation (Calvo and Friston, 2017).
Rather than appealing to the notion of representation, the
generative models that predict the structure of the world has
the function of mediating the organism’s interactions with the
world rather than reconstructing them. How does free energy
enactivism appeal to models of the world without the notion of
representation? Friston (2011; 2013b) suggests that it is not the
case that an agent merely reconstructs a model of the world,
but the agent is a model: the organism embodies an optimal
model of its environment. In this sense, environmental features
play a constitutive role in cognition; the internal and external
morphology of an agent is constrained by the environment
in which it is found. This is a bidirectional process because
an organism’s morphology also determines the environment in
which the organism can survive. The interplay varies along
timescales in that the agent may adapt to the environment in
the long term but will change the environment for shorter term
survival and eﬃciency.
Construed in this way, free energy enactivism illustrates a deep
continuity between mind and life which is typical of enactive
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 5 January 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 543076
fpsyg-12-543076 January 29, 2021 Time: 11:31 # 6
Venter Embodied, Embedded Predictive Processing
approaches to cognition. On this view, the free energy principle
applies to bacteria and plants as much as it applies to human
agents in that these living systems engage in adaptive behavior
(Kirchhoﬀ and Froese, 2017). There is an implication that follows
from this. If minimizing free energy is suﬃcient for mind and
life, then all systems that resist disorder (or stay within bounds)
exhibit mentality and are alive. There are two ways such a claim
can be supported. Either one holds the view that mentality is
not limited to living systems or by maintaining that life and
mind are ubiquitous features (Kirchhoﬀ and Froese, 2017). Both
options give rise to panpsychism unless something further is
added to the equation. The worry is that the scope of free
energy enactivism is too broad in application and seemingly
applies to non-living, non-cognitive systems. In other words, the
boundaries between living, cognitive systems and the external
non-cognitive world are blurred.
Furthermore, the free energy principle is construed as a
nomological principle that all living systems abide by. It has
been described as “normative” (Friston, 2013a), an “overarching
rationale” (Clark, 2013), and a “law-like regularity” (Hohwy,
2013). On the radical construal by free energy enactivism,
an organism is dynamically coupled with the environment
through generalized synchrony (Friston, 2013b). But the notion
of generalized synchrony is observed even in pendulum clocks
that eventually synchronize through the beams from which
they are suspended. This implies that one clock infers the state
of another and is a generative model of the dynamics of the
environment (Bruineberg et al., 2018, p. 2,437). Taking the
nomological explanation presumed by free energy enactivism
seriously means that all instances of generalized synchrony
are instances of free energy minimization. And free energy
minimization is a suﬃcient condition for a system to be a
living system. The implication is that by applying a general law
such as the free energy principle to dynamical systems, from
pendulum clocks to human cognition, the explanatory value of
the principle is lost. “Laws simply tell us what happens; they
do not tell us why or how” (Cummins, 2000, p. 119). Arguably,
the free energy principle can explain the capacities of dynamical
systems but it does not follow that it can predict all capacities
of such systems (or similar systems)—despite its ambitions to
do so. The free energy principle serves well to explain the
organization of dynamical systems, but it does not follow that
the principle then adequately explains cognition. The free energy
principle is very wide in scope and overshoots by trying to fully
explain cognition. Rather than ambitiously attempting to explain
all phenomena with a single principle, the aim should be to
search for an explanation that captures the regularities of whole
embodied organisms and their interaction with the environment.
The free energy principle is presented as doing exactly this but
I argue that despite how it is presented, the explanandum of
the free energy principle under free energy enactivism is not the
same as that of PP.
One way to sidestep the challenges is to consider the
diﬀerences between non-living dynamical systems, simple life-
forms and complex human agents where the latter may
employ representational knowledge structures. But free energy
enactivism rejects this position and suggests that an appeal to
representation is not necessary. My proposal is that only by
explaining additional components of the sophisticated system
do we get an explanatorily useful account of perception, action
and cognition. The free energy enactivist interpretation of PP
also leaves much to be desired in terms of accounting for
all the components of the system that realize prediction error
minimization. I address this gap in the rest of this paper.
FINDING A THIRD WAY
Predictive processing (PP) is committed to providing causal and
constitutive explanations of cognitive capacities. Achieving this
requires investigating what kind of (methodological) explanation
ﬁts well with PP. I suggest that the explanatory methods of PP
should be aligned with the mechanistic approach to explanation
and that this requires including all components that realize
cognition (including the body). Currently, both cognitivist PP
and free energy enactivism oﬀer no more than mere description
and functional analysis, and though these accounts do not reject a
mechanistic approach, they fail to includeall components in their
respective explanations. The two accounts that I have unpacked
also diﬀer in what they take to constitute cognition. Cognitivist
PP restricts cognition to the neural organ and anything beyond
that, including the body, only serves as a tool to minimize
prediction error. The body as mechanism is reduced to how it
contributes to prediction error minimization which is realized
only in the neural domain. Free energy enactivism, on the
other hand, extends cognition beyond the organism into the
world such that the boundaries between cognitive and non-
cognitive phenomena become blurred. I propose that these
views represent extremes that alone do not successfully explain
cognition. Instead, I defend a strongly embodied view that
embeds the agent in the environment in which it is found
(Friston, 2011; Pezzulo, 2014; Clark, 2015). I will argue that this
is aligned with the mechanistic approach of explanation which
identiﬁes all relevant components of a system in realizing the
phenomenon to be explained thus respecting both functional
and structural properties. Jakob Hohwy, the key proponent
of cognitivist PP , identiﬁes the mechanistic potential of the
framework but remains committed to a functionalist explanation
of cognitive capacities in virtue of concepts such as precision,
prediction error and model optimization (Harkness, 2015, p. 6).
I suggest that PP can explain common sets of sub-capacities
of cognition and their organization. This can then be used to
provide an account of how cognitive capacities are realized in
diﬀerent biological systems. On the strong embodied view, the
body is a constituent of cognition, i.e., it is part of the mechanisms
that realize the function of the system. An account of PP
should include an explanation that includes the body as realizer
of prediction error minimization given that all components
of the system and their capacities must be explained on the
mechanistic view.
Explanation in cognitivist PP and free energy enactivism is
aimed at describing free energy minimization (or prediction
error minimization), but both accounts neglect to consider the
structures and mechanisms that realize this phenomenon. This
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 6 January 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 543076
fpsyg-12-543076 January 29, 2021 Time: 11:31 # 7
Venter Embodied, Embedded Predictive Processing
is not to say that the contributions of these accounts are in vain
but functional explanations can be enriched with mechanistic
explanations (Piccinini and Craver, 2011; Harkness, 2015).
Functional explanations often serve as ﬁrst steps in mechanistic
explanation in the sense that functional explanations provide
sketches of mechanisms and the gaps are then later ﬁlled out
(Piccinini and Craver, 2011, p. 284). Mechanistic explanations
identify the relevant components of the system and respects
the importance of both functional and structural properties.
Given the importance of the structure of the system in which a
phenomenon is realized, I suggest that mechanistic explanation
serves PP better. Adopting a mechanistic approach enables the
explanation of the capacities of the system and its component
parts as opposed to only explaining the functions and eﬀects of
the system. The structures and processes that realize prediction
error minimization are explained rather than merely describing
it via functional analyses or nomological principles.
Mechanistic Explanation and Predictive
Processing
Mechanistic explanation involves identifying the relevant parts
of the mechanism, determining the operation they perform,
and providing an account of how parts and operations are
organized such that, under speciﬁc contextual conditions, the
mechanism realizes the phenomenon of interest (Bechtel, 2009,
p. 553). The Watt governor can serve as an example here
and is often used as an analogy in dynamical systems theory
of cognition. A Watt governor has the function of regulating
the speed of engines. It functions to keep a system within
a particular state (or range of states) and is constituted by
several independent parts: the ﬂywheel, the spindle and arms,
and a type of linkage system connected to a valve. Each
component of the governor operates on its own principles and
performs a speciﬁc operation which contributes to the overall
function of the system. It is because the spindle arms fulﬁll
their function of rising and falling in response to the speed
of the ﬂywheel that their angle can be used to manipulate
the linkage system. The spindle arms then open or close the
valve allowing more or less fuel to pass through, increasing or
decreasing the speed of the engine. The valve has no access
to the speed of the ﬂywheel without the spindle arms and
linkage mechanism. All these mechanism form part of the
system because they “encode” information that can be used
by the valve. The Watt governor is a control system which is
dependent on feedback to revise and redirect the behavior of parts
of the mechanism.
There are uncanny similarities between the Watt governor as
a mechanism that keeps the speed of engines within a particular
range of states and the prediction error minimization system that
functions to keep a living organism within a particular range of
states. I suggest that the cognitive system comprises the whole
embodied agent which includes the nervous system, the body,
and relevant aspects of the environment. Like the Watt governor,
each component of the embodied agent is a mechanism which
operates on its own principles and performs speciﬁc operations,
together contributing to the overall function of minimizing
prediction error and keeping the agent within a particular range
of states. The whole embodied agent is a control system and
relies on feedback to control and direct motor activity and
behavior. I suggest that prediction error minimization is not only
performed through an interplay between predictions in the brain
and activity at the sensory boundary (as proposed by cognitivist
PP). Instead, we should think of prediction error minimization
as the result of each component of the system (including the
body) operating on its own principles and performing its own
functions. For example, the body, in virtue of being a model of
the environment, minimizes free energy by adapting accordingly
across a long-term timescale. Prediction error minimization is
realized by generative models in the brain and together with
bodily movements the function is fulﬁlled. Representational
mental states constitute only one component of the overall
mechanistic system. The body is also a constitutive component
in the process of minimizing prediction error and should not be
treated as only a tool to fulﬁll the function of the brain. Each of
the components of the system fulﬁlls its own operations allowing
the system to use the information to minimize prediction error
in the long run.
EMBODIED, EMBEDDED PREDICTIVE
PROCESSING
As I have unpacked in earlier sections, prediction error
minimization and the free energy principle are not identical
concepts. They diﬀer in scope and explanation. This view has
recently been argued for by Hohwy (2020) who proposes that
the free energy minimization account provides a conceptual
and mathematical analysis that is primarily a nomological
explanation and PP oﬀers a falsiﬁable process-theory that is a
mere application of the free energy principle. Another approach
that separates free energy minimization and prediction error
minimization is oﬀered by Bruineberg et al. (2018) who propose
that perceptual inference is not compatible with the claims made
by the free energy principle. Analyzing these two arguments
lies beyond the scope of this paper but is worth mentioning
as key players in the debate separating the two concepts.
The account that I develop is based on the separation of
prediction error minimization and the free energy principle.
Yet it cannot be neatly separated from either, and it does not
need to be because it does not reject the compatibility of the
two concepts. EEPP ﬁts into the larger ambitions of the free
energy principle and is also a way of explaining how prediction
error minimization is realized. In this sense, the account that
I develop is more sympathetic to that of Hohwy (2020) as
opposed to that of Bruineberg et al. (2018) because my account
does not commit to the idea that free energy minimization and
perceptual inference are incompatible. Rather, these processes
are realized at diﬀerent levels of the cognitive system and
the diﬀerent mechanisms of the system operate on their own
principles. Making space for both these concepts in a single
account provides at least one good reason to consider EEPP as
a viable alternative approach. Prediction error minimization is
a process that gives rise to perception and (to a certain degree)
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 7 January 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 543076
fpsyg-12-543076 January 29, 2021 Time: 11:31 # 8
Venter Embodied, Embedded Predictive Processing
enables action. Free energy minimization is implemented at the
level of the whole embodied organism in virtue of the agent
being a model of the environment. The embodied agent is
embedded in the environment and engages in active inference
to minimize uncertainty and disorder in the long term. Some
insight about cognition can be derived a priori from the free
energy principle, but the principle alone is too wide in scope
to tell us all we want to know about cognition. Cognitivist
PP , on the other hand, makes use of the free energy principle
to develop an account of prediction error minimization but
consequently restricts the scope of explanation to the neural
domain underplaying the role of the body. The account that
I develop will show that both these approaches contribute
useful insights to our understanding of cognition but that by
continuing to develop in opposing directions, the debate is losing
sight of the phenomena in question: cognitive, embodied agents
embedded in the world.
As cognitive, embodied agents we are directed at the world
in a structured way. This capacity and our ability to act on the
world is what sets us apart from other non-living systems. As I
will argue in the next sections, the mechanisms that constitute
cognition are not restricted to the neural domain. Prediction
error minimization is instantiated not only by the neural domain
but involves the whole system comprising the nervous system,
body and relevant aspects of the environment (Anderson, 2014;
Pezzulo, 2014; Clark, 2017a). I propose that prediction error
minimization is deeply dependent on the body of an agent, such
that the body-beyond-brain plays a constitutive role in cognitive
processing. The body plays three constitutive roles in cognition:
1. The body regulates cognitive activity, ensuring that
cognition and action are intricately linked. A prime
example of this is the outﬁelder’s problem.
2. The body acts as distributor in the sense that it carries some
of the cognitive load of neural structures. This is illustrated
by examples such as interoception and the use of gestures.
3. The body serves to constrain the information that is
processed by an agent. This is supported by the idea that
the agent is a model of the environment.
The descriptions of these roles are not separable in a very clear
way and often a single example can be used to explain multiple
roles. I unpack each of these roles in the following sections.
The Body as Regulator
The idea that cognitive processes serve to accommodate
interaction with the world as opposed to reconstructing the
world ﬁts well to our understanding of the body as regulator.
In embodied cognition approaches, the body as regulator thesis
states that “an agent’s body functions to regulate cognitive activity
over space and time, ensuring that cognition and action are
tightly coordinated” (Wilson and Foglia, 2017). The embodied PP
account explains how agents are geared toward fast, successful,
and ﬂuent engagement with the environment, using simple
routines and minimal representation. The whole embodied
agent includes a cognitive system that is made up of several
mechanisms each operating on its own principles of operation.
The body serves as regulator insofar as it enables the agent
to perceive and interact with the world through embodying
the causal structure of the dynamics of the environment
and itself. Successful movement and action in the world are
possible because of coupling between agent and environment
and does not necessarily require reconstructing the sensory
signals. Consider the outﬁelder’s problem: this scenario would
involve a series of complex, action-sensitive information streams
being fed to the brain—as if the agent is actually running
to cancel the optical accelerations of the ball (Clark, 2017b,
p. 735). The complexity involved in such a process would
seem to count in favor of an account that can explain action
and inference in simpler, embodied terms. This captures the
notion of ecological eﬃciency which calls for a division of
labor between brain, body, and environment. Division of labor
between mind, body, and world enables the “productively lazy
brain to do as little as possible while solving (or rather, while
the whole, environmentally-located system) solves the problem”
(Clark, 2015, p. 12). The cognitivist PP account can deliver
an explanation of the outﬁelder’s problem but not without
“throwing away” the world and the body. For the cognitivist,
the action-perception process involved in the outﬁelder’s problem
is one of inference that is a result of generative models that
reconstruct a mirror of the world. The function of the system,
on this account, is to generate hypotheses and ﬁnd the best
explanation of the sensory perturbations (the ball is moving and
will drop to point x so in order to minimize prediction error,
the outﬁelder must predict where the ball will land and then
act in the world to move to point x). But on the embodied
account that I develop, the function of the predictive system
is to accommodate sensory perturbations to enable action in
the world (the outﬁelder moves their body in such a way
as to stay in a particular angle to the ball until meeting at
the same point).
The embodied system is eﬃcient because it uses minimal
resources to capture what is necessary to act in the world.
Navigating my way through a busy street is a complex task
that requires movement of the body, adapting to uneven
sidewalks, avoiding running children and other obstacles. The
body regulates the agent’s interaction with the environment
in virtue of the coupled dynamics between the environment
and the body. This means commanding models with the least
prediction error or with the least sensory signal to “explain away.”
This notion requires an evidentiary boundary to distinguish
between inferences and what is predicted. Cognitivist PP takes
this boundary to be solid and clear “. . .with the brain on one side
and the worldly and bodily causes on the other side” (Hohwy,
2016, p. 281). But on the embodied approach, the boundary
becomes ﬂexible and immutable (Clark, 2017c; Kirchhoﬀ and
Kiverstein, 2019). This does not mean the boundary does not
exist—this would lead to the dissolution of the predictive task 2.
2The debate on the nature and how far out the boundary extends beyond the neural
domain is still hotly debated. Kirchhoﬀ and Kiverstein (2019) defend an extended
mind view and propose that the boundary (demarcated by the Markov blanket)
extends all the way out into the world. On my account, the boundary is determined
by the lived body of the agent. Concretely, this means beyond the neural domain
to include the body but not including tools and other resources out in the world.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 8 January 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 543076
fpsyg-12-543076 January 29, 2021 Time: 11:31 # 9
Venter Embodied, Embedded Predictive Processing
Instead, the boundary is determined by the agent and her lived
body. It is not necessary for the body of the agent to be modeled
and predicted in the same way as the external world because it
does not lie outside the boundary. The boundary is determined by
the physical lived body of the agent insofar as the agent embodies
the causal structure of the environment which gives rise to a state
of action readiness; the embodied agent is ready to act on the
salient action possibilities in the environment. As active systems,
we are constantly seeking which sensory input to sample next
instead of passively matching prior probabilities with states of the
environment. The body is crucial to the successful execution of
this task because without it, there would be no interaction in the
world, nor would there be any prediction error to minimize. The
embodied PP account claims that the brain minimizes prediction
error to accommodate the sensory barrage. Accommodating the
sensory barrage involves other low-cost methods that do not
imply action-neutral modeling of the environment.
The Body as Distributor
The explanation above ﬁts well with another way in which the
body plays a constitutive role in cognition: as distributor. The
body as distributor thesis states that “an agent’s body functions
to distribute computational and representational load between
neural and non-neural structures” (Wilson and Foglia, 2017). In
the PP account, this means that prediction error is minimized
by both neural and non-neural structures, such as the body-
beyond-brain. A similar view is also put forward by Bruineberg
et al. (2018) who propose that the predictive neural system
does not “know” about the viable states in which the agent
must maintain its body (a certain temperature, for example)
and therefore such an embodied state can only be maintained
by the body itself, i.e., without neural mediation. They call
this embodied surprisal and use it as a premise to argue for
the incompatibility of the free energy principle and prediction
error minimization. Although I agree that the body can realize
the function of prediction error minimization without neural
mediation, I do not propose that these processes are separate and
incompatible but rather that prediction error minimization in
the neural domain and the minimization of, so-called, embodied
surprisal are intricately linked.
On my account, action can be described as a process of
inference that uses a non-reconstructive strategy to keep certain
sensory stimulations within bounds. It is thus not necessary
to reconstruct a model of the real world to plan, reason and
guide successful behavior and action. Instead interaction with
the environment is “a kind ofperceptually-maintained motor-
informational grip on the world: a low-cost perception-action
routine that retrieves the right information just-in-time for use”
(Clark, 2017b, p. 737). The idea of body as distributor can be
explored in EEPP by looking at how interoceptive information is
processed. Perception of the body plays an important role in how
we represent the world. For example, imagine you are watching
a horror movie. As a result, your attention increases and your
heartbeat accelerates. You hear a sound just outside the window
which can be caused by several things. For the purpose of this
example, let us limit the pool of hypotheses to two: (1) the wind
is blowing a tree branch against the window, or (2) a thief is
trying to gain entry into your house. Let us suppose you live in
a low-crime area and have never experienced a break-in. The
hypothesis with the highest prior probability should be that the
wind is blowing a tree branch against the window. But given the
interoceptive information and physiological state of your body,
the thief-hypothesis has higher prior-probability3. This is because
all the evidence (including interoceptive information) has to
be explained. All available sensory information makes up the
evidence against which a hypothesis is tested. Importantly, this
sensory information is not limited to seeing hearing, smelling,
tasting, and touch but also includes kinesthetic, proprioceptive
and interoceptive information. In order to most eﬀectively reduce
prediction error, the whole embodied agent is involved. The
body of the agent (in the above case, through interoception)
contributes to the minimization of prediction error because it
carries useful and reliable information.
The Body as Constraint
The body as constraint thesis states that: “an agent’s body
functions to signiﬁcantly constrain the nature and content
of representations processed by that agent’s cognitive system”
(Wilson and Foglia, 2017). On PP , this can be understood in
terms of how the agent models the environment. There are two
ways in which the embodied agent models the environment.
First, in terms of embodying a model of the environment, i.e.,
being a model of the environment. Second, in terms of generating
action-oriented models of the world, i.e., having a model of the
environment. Explaining in detail the two ways in which an
agent models the environment in virtue of being an embodied
agent requires more space than the scope of this paper allows
and so the exposition that follows is brief. First, the embodied
agent is not only modeled in the predictive system as part of
the outside world but also acts as the point of reference from
which the world is perceived. Interaction with the environment is
made possible not only because the agent generates models of the
world but the agent is its own best possible model of the world
(Bruineberg et al., 2018, p. 2,425). The agent embodies a model
of the environment in virtue of the coupled relation of internal
and external dynamics, i.e., the structure of the environment is
reﬂected in the embodied agent. In this sense, the environment
and the embodied agent structure and constrain one another
(Bruineberg et al., 2018, p. 2,422).
Second, the models that are generated in the predictive
system are constrained by the structure of the embodied agent.
Representing the world involves representing properties of
objects such as shape, color, size and location but possibilities
for action are also modeled and these aﬀordances are only
modeled as they are relevant and salient to the embodied agent.
The aﬀordance of sitting on a chair is only available to me, a
human agent, insofar as I have the necessary limbs and joints
that make this possible. My body thus constrains the models
of the world that are generated; if I am paraplegic, a chair
does not aﬀord sitting but is rather an obstacle that I must
3One could argue that another way of thinking about this is in terms of cognitive
bias, for example if you were primed into expecting a thief because this a break-
in occurred in the ﬁlm you were watching. But this explanation does not suﬃce
because interoceptive information is often more reliable than sensory stimuli.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 9 January 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 543076
fpsyg-12-543076 January 29, 2021 Time: 11:31 # 10
Venter Embodied, Embedded Predictive Processing
avoid while moving around in my wheelchair. Most compatible
with the embodied PP account is the notion of action-oriented
representations. Action-oriented representations are aimed at
driving speciﬁc action and are not reconstructive and detached
from the world, nor are they disembodied (i.e., independent from
the agent and their abilities). Action-oriented representations
encode the aﬀordances of objects as they are relevant and salient
to the agent. Part of the predictive task is to anticipate and
discriminate between things in the environment that matter to an
agent and those that do not. In this sense, “the brain is constantly
computing—partially and in parallel—a large set of possible
actions” (Clark, 2016, p. 180). Concretely, this implies that the
generative models in the predictive system are not detached and
neutral reconstructions of the world but rather generative models
of the possible ways in which the agent can interact with the world
as constrained by their body. Such action-oriented generative
models enable ﬂuent interaction with the world because they are
generated from the perspective of the agent, i.e., it is speciﬁcally
relevant and salient to them in virtue of being an embodied agent,
embedded in a speciﬁc environment.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, I distinguished between two radical interpretations
of the predictive processing framework. The divergence between
the two positions is motivated by the conceptual distinction
between the free energy principle and inferential perception
(realized as prediction error minimization). As an alternative
position, I propose a strongly embodied interpretation of
predictive processing that take the whole embodied agent
as well as relevant aspects of the environment to realize
prediction error minimization. This alternative position includes
the body as a constitutive part of cognition and as realizer
of prediction error minimization. It also includes relevant
aspects of the environment to constitute prediction error
4 There is a general divide between the action-ﬁrst approach—construing
aﬀordances as byproducts of action plans—and the spectator-ﬁrst approach—
which highlights the role of belief-like representations of scenes with which
an agent does not necessarily interact (Siegel, 2014, p. 51). I defend the view
that aﬀordances are relations between aspects of the environment and the
abilities of an agent. This is in line with free energy enactivism which also
maintains that aﬀordances stand out as relevant in a speciﬁc situation lived
by the agent and constitute the (pre-reﬂective) experiential equivalent of bodily
action readiness: “the readiness of the aﬀordance-related ability” (Bruineberg and
Rietveld, 2014, p. 2).
minimization. This can be understood in terms of aﬀordances.
Rather than include the whole environmental system in cognitive
function (as proposed by free energy enactivism), I propose
that only the brain and body-beyond-brain form part of the
cognitive system. This implies that the boundary between
cognitive and non-cognitive phenomena is not rigid and pre-
determined but rather ﬂexible and immutable. Developing
a full account of EEPP is an enormous undertaking and
requires contributions from many ﬁelds of science and
philosophy. This paper aimed to deliver a starting point for
such developments in the ﬁeld rather than develop a fully
ﬂeshed out account.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The original contributions presented in the study are included
in the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can be
directed to the corresponding author/s.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
The author conﬁrms being the sole contributor of this work and
has approved it for publication.
FUNDING
Gefördert durch die Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) -
Projektnummer GRK-2185/1 (DFG-Graduiertenkolleg Situated
Cognition). Funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG, German Research Foundation) - project number GRK-
2185/1 (DFG Research Training Group Situated Cognition).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am grateful to Prof. Dr. Tobias Schlicht and Dr. Krzysztof
Dołe ¸ga for their very helpful comments on this research.
Thank you to the two reviewers for their very helpful and
constructive feedback.
REFERENCES
Alsmith, A. J. T., and de Vignemont, F. (2012). Embodying the mind and
representing the body. Rev. Philos. Psychol. 3, 1–13. doi: 10.1007/s13164-012-
0085-4
Anderson, M. L. (2014). After Phrenology: Neural Reuse and the Interactive Brain .
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bechtel, W. (2009). Constructing a philosophy of science of cognitive science. Top.
Cogn. Sci. 1, 548–569. doi: 10.1111/j.1756-8765.2009.01039.x
Bruineberg, J., and Rietveld, E. (2014). Self-organization, free energy minimization,
and optimal grip on a ﬁeld of aﬀordances. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 8:599. doi:
10.3389/fnhum.2014.00599
Bruineberg, J., Rietveld, E., and Kiverstein, J. (2018). The anticipating brain is not
a scientist: the free-energy principle from an ecological-enactive perspective.
Synthese 195, 2417–2444. doi: 10.1007/s11229-016-1239-1
Burr, C., and Jones, M. (2016). The body as laboratory: prediction-error
minimization, embodiment, and representation. Philos. Psychol. 29, 586–600.
doi: 10.1080/09515089.2015.1135238
Calvo, P., and Friston, K. (2017). Predicting green: really radical (plant)
predictive processing. J. R. Soc. Interface 14:20170096. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2017.
0096
Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the
future of cognitive science. Behav. Brain Sci. 36, 181–204. doi: 10.1017/
S0140525X12000477
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 10 January 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 543076
fpsyg-12-543076 January 29, 2021 Time: 11:31 # 11
Venter Embodied, Embedded Predictive Processing
Clark, A. (2015). Radical predictive processing. South. J. Philos. 53, 3–27. doi:
10.1111/sjp.12120
Clark, A. (2016). Surﬁng Uncertainty. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Clark, A. (2017a). A nice surprise? Predictive processing and the active pursuit
of novelty. Phenomenol. Cogn. Sci. 17, 521–534. doi: 10.1007/s11097-01
7-9525-z
Clark, A. (2017b). Busting out: predictive brains, embodied minds, and the puzzle
of the evidentiary veil. Nous 51, 727–753. doi: 10.1111/nous.12140
Clark, A. (2017c). “How to knit your own markov blanket?: resisting the second
law with metamorphic minds, ” in Philosophy and Predictive Coding , eds T.
Metzinger, and W. Wiese (Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group), 1–19. doi: 10.
15502/9783958573031
Colombo, M., and Wright, C. (2016). Explanatory pluralism: an unrewarding
prediction error for free energy theorists. Brain Cogn. 112, 3–12. doi: 10.1016/j.
bandc.2016.02.003
Cummins, R. (2000). “How does it work?” versus “what are the laws?”: Two
conceptions of psychological explanation’ , ” inExplanation and Cognition , eds
F. C. Keil, and R. A. Wilson (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 117–144.
Egan, F. (2018). “‘Function-theoretic explanation and the search for neural
mechanisms’ , ” inExplanation and Integration in Mind and Brain Science , ed.
D. M. Kaplan (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 145–163.
Fotopoulou, A., and Tsakiris, M. (2017). Mentalizing homeostasis: the social origins
of interoceptive inference-replies to commentaries. Neuropsychoanalysis 19,
71–76. doi: 10.1080/15294145.2017.1307667
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: a uniﬁed brain theory?. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 11, 127–138. doi: 10.1038/nrn2787
Friston, K. (2011). “Embodied inference: or “i think therefore i am, if i am what
i think”, ” inThe Implications of Embodiment (Cognition and Communication) ,
eds W. Tschacher, and C. Bergomi (Exeter: Imprint Academic), 89–125. doi:
10.1007/978-3-319-75726-1_8
Friston, K. (2013a). Active inference and free energy.Behav. Brain Sci.36, 212–213.
doi: 10.1017/s0140525x12002142
Friston, K. (2013b). Life as we know it. J. R. Soc. Interface 10:20130475. doi:
10.1098/rsif.2013.0475
Friston, K., and Stephan, K. E. (2007). Free-energy and the brain. Synthese 159,
417–458. doi: 10.1007/s11229-007-9237-y
Harkness, D. L. (2015). “From explanatory ambition to explanatory power, ” inOpen
MIND, eds T. Metzinger, and J. Windt (Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group),
doi: 10.15502/9783958570153
Hohwy, J. (2013). The Predictive Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hohwy, J. (2015). “The neural organ explains the mind, ” in Open MIND, eds T.
Metzinger, and J. Windt (Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group), doi: 10.15502/
9783958570016
Hohwy, J. (2016). The self-evidencing brain. Nous 50, 259–285. doi: 10.1111/nous.
12062
Hohwy, J. (2018). “‘Predictive processing hypothesis’ , ” inThe Oxford Handbook of
4E Cognition, 1st Edn, eds A. Newen, L. De Bruin, and S. Gallagher (Oxford:
Oxford University Press), 127–146.
Hohwy, J. (2020). Self-supervision, normativity and the free energy principle.
Synthese. 1–25. doi: 10.1007/s11229-020-02622-2
Hohwy, J., and Michael, J. (2017). “Why should any body have a
self?, ” in The Subject’s Matter: Self-Consciousness and the Body , eds
F. de Vignemont, and A. Alsmith (Cambridge MA: MIT Press),
363–391.
Hutto, D. (2018). Getting into predictive processing’s great guessing game:
bootstrap heaven or hell?. Synthese 195, 2445–2458. doi: 10.1007/s11229-017-
1385-0
Hutto, D., and Myin, E. (2013). Radicalizing Enactivism: Basic Minds Without
Content. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Hutto, D., and Myin, E. (2017). Evolving Enactivism: Basic Minds Meet Content .
Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Kirchhoﬀ, M. (2017). Predictive brains and embodied, enactive cognition.Synthese
195, 2355–2366. doi: 10.1007/s11229-017-1534-5
Kirchhoﬀ, M. (2018). “‘The body in action: predictive processing and the
embodiment thesis’ , ” inThe Oxford Handbook of 4E Cognition, eds A. Newen, L.
de Bruin, and S. Gallagher (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 243–260.
Kirchhoﬀ, M., and Froese, T. (2017). Where there is life there is mind: in support of
a strong life-mind continuity thesis. Entropy 19, 1–18. doi: 10.3390/e19040169
Kirchhoﬀ, M. D., and Kiverstein, J. (2019). How to determine the boundaries of
the mind: a Markov blanket proposal.Synthese. 1–20. doi: 10.1007/s11229-019-
02370-y
Kiverstein, J. (2018). Free energy and the self: an ecological–enactive interpretation.
Topoi 39, 559–574. doi: 10.1007/s11245-018-9561-5
Metzinger, T., and Wiese, W. (2017). Philosophy and Predictive Processing .
Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group.
Pezzulo, G. (2014). Why do you fear the bogeyman? An embodied predictive
coding model of perceptual inference. Cogn. Aﬀect. Behav. Neurosci. 14, 902–
911. doi: 10.3758/s13415-013-0227-x
Piccinini, G., and Craver, C. (2011). Integrating psychology and neuroscience:
functional analyses as mechanism sketches. Synthese 183, 283–311. doi: 10.
1007/s11229-011-9898-4
Prinz, J. (2004). Gut Reactions: A Perceptual Theory of Emotion . New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.
Rowlands, M. (2010). The New Science of the Mind. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Rupert, R. D. (2009). Cognitive Systems and the Extended Mind . New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.
Seth, A. K. (2013). Interoceptive inference, emotion, and the embodied self.Trends
Cogn. Sci. 17, 565–573. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2013.09.007
Shapiro, L. A. (2004). The Mind Incarnate. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Siegel, S. (2014). “‘ Aﬀordances and the contents of perception’ , ” inDoes Perception
Have Content?, ed. B. Brogaard (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 51–75. doi:
10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199756018.003.0003
Sims, A. (2016). A problem of scope for the free energy principle as a theory of
cognition. Philos. Psychol. 29, 967–980. doi: 10.1080/09515089.2016.1200024
Wilson, R., and Foglia, L. (2017). Embodied Cognition, The Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy. Available online at: https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2017/
entries/embodied-cognition/ (accessed August 15, 2019).
Conﬂict of Interest: The author declares that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2021 Venter. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or
reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the
copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal
is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 11 January 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 543076