HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY
published: 06 January 2022
doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2021.782781
Edited by:
Yan Mark Yuﬁk,
Virtual Structures Research Inc.,
United States
Reviewed by:
Todd L. Hylton,
University of California, San Diego,
United States
Vladimir Kranopolsky,
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA), United States
*Correspondence:
Rodrigo C. Vergara
rodrigo.vergara_o@umce.cl
Received: 24 September 2021
Accepted: 13 December 2021
Published: 06 January 2022
Citation:
Vicencio-Jimenez S, Villalobos M,
Maldonado PE and Vergara RC
(2022) The Energy Homeostasis
Principle: A Naturalistic Approach to
Explain the Emergence of Behavior.
Front. Syst. Neurosci. 15:782781.
doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2021.782781
The Energy Homeostasis Principle: A
Naturalistic Approach to Explain the
Emergence of Behavior
Sergio Vicencio-Jimenez1, Mario Villalobos2, Pedro E. Maldonado3 and
Rodrigo C. Vergara4*
1The Center for Hearing and Balance, Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States, 2Escuela de Psicología y Filosofía, Universidad de Tarapacá, Arica, Chile,
3Laboratorio de Neurosistemas, Departamento de Neurociencia & BNI, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Chile,
Santiago, Chile, 4Departamento de Kinesiología, Facultad de Artes y Educación Física, Universidad Metropolitana de las
Ciencias de la Educación, Ñuñoa, Chile
It is still elusive to explain the emergence of behavior and understanding based on its
neural mechanisms. One renowned proposal is the Free Energy Principle (FEP), which
uses an information-theoretic framework derived from thermodynamic considerations to
describe how behavior and understanding emerge. FEP starts from a whole-organism
approach, based on mental states and phenomena, mapping them into the neuronal
substrate. An alternative approach, the Energy Homeostasis Principle (EHP), initiates
a similar explanatory effort but starts from single-neuron phenomena and builds up to
whole-organism behavior and understanding. In this work, we further develop the EHP
as a distinct but complementary vision to FEP and try to explain how behavior and
understanding would emerge from the local requirements of the neurons. Based on EHP
and a strict naturalist approach that sees living beings as physical and deterministic
systems, we explain scenarios where learning would emerge without the need for
volition or goals. Given these starting points, we state several considerations of how we
see the nervous system, particularly the role of the function, purpose, and conception
of goal-oriented behavior. We problematize these conceptions, giving an alternative
teleology-free framework in which behavior and, ultimately, understanding would still
emerge. We reinterpret neural processing by explaining basic learning scenarios up to
simple anticipatory behavior. Finally, we end the article with an evolutionary perspective
of how this non-goal-oriented behavior appeared. We acknowledge that our proposal, in
its current form, is still far from explaining the emergence of understanding. Nonetheless,
we set the ground for an alternative neuron-based framework to ultimately explain
understanding.
Keywords: homeostasis, free energy principle, behavior, energy, neural network
INTRODUCTION
When an animal displays different behaviors, what are the primary processes occurring in
the nervous system? How do neurons, neuronal networks, and ultimately the whole nervous
system participate in behavior generation? This article argues that the nervous system unfolds
autogenous mechanisms of energetic homeostasis, maintaining its energy equilibrium as a system.
Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 1 January 2022 | Volume 15 | Article 782781
Vicencio-Jimenez et al. A Naturalistic Approach to Explain Behavior
In our view, the nervous system operates in the continuous
present tense of its structural dynamics under strictly local rules
of energy stability, without pursuing biological goals or adaptive
adjustments for the organism. This spontaneous process of
maintaining its energy balance occurs so that under statistically
normal anatomical, physiological, and ecological conditions, it
results precisely in those behaviors that prove to be adaptive for
the animal.
This view of the nervous system corresponds, in essence, to
what has been recently introduced as the Energy Homeostasis
Principle (EHP; Vergara et al., 2019). This theoretical proposal
draws strongly from the autopoietic theory of cognition in the
sense of being strictly naturalistic (Maturana, 1978; Villalobos
and Ward, 2015; Villalobos, 2015), and resonates, although
with important nuances, with some aspects of the Free Energy
Principle (FEP) approach in theoretical neuroscience (Friston
and Stephan, 2007; Friston, 2010). The EHP does not hold
that animal behavior and cognition arise only because the
nervous system is a homeostatic energy system. If that were
the case, we should observe cognition and complex behavior
in any homeostatic energy system, as may occur in an open
thermodynamic system that exhibits some degree of stability,
such as tornadoes and stars (Ulanowicz and Hannon, 1987;
McGregor and Virgo, 2011). Instead, the proposal is to realize
that while we observe the behavior or the signs of cognition
shown by an organism, its nervous system operates by simply
following, in its own way, the EHP.
The nervous system is a homeostatic energy system, like
other similar natural systems, but with significant structural and
organizational features that make it unique. These features are
essential because they explain why the nervous system, despite
operating under the EHP, can generate phenomena such as
animal behavior and cognition. The argument EHP asserts is
that despite all the unique features we may find in the nervous
system, it remains the fact that its operations follow, ultimately,
homeostatic energy mechanisms.
This latter statement merits further discussion. When we
speak of the unique features in the nervous system, we are
not inviting the reader to picture mysterious non-natural
features. All thermodynamic systems that maintain stability and
integrity for the period they exist, long or short, have their
own features related to their specific structural compositions
and dynamic patterns. Candle flames and tornadoes are both
dissipative structures that exhibit thermodynamic stability in
their respective magnitudes or scales. However, only candle
flames generate fast exothermic combustion reactions, radiate
light, and illuminate a dark room. Conversely, tornadoes, not
candle flames, can travel kilometers through large geographic
areas, lifting and violently shaking heavy objects. There is
nothing mysterious about these differences. They relate to each
system’s respective chemical and physical features, which must
be considered to explain the varied phenomena associated with
each system. What is a candle doing as a system when its flame
radiates light and warms up our hands? From the systemic
thermodynamic point of view, it is simply maintaining its
stability and integrity as a dissipative system. When a tornado
passes through a village and destroys the houses, what is it
doing as a system? Again, from the systemic thermodynamic
point of view, it is simply maintaining its stability and integrity
as a dissipative system. But, if both systems are doing the
same, how do they generate such different phenomena and
results? The answer lies in the unique features of each system,
the context in which they form, their material qualities, and
so on.
The nervous system is a homeostatic energy system.
Still, the specific way it manifests such quality given its
biological (e.g., histological) composition, anatomical structure
and physiological organization, its looped coupling with both the
internal milieu and the external environment, its development
within the organism, generate distinctive results and phenomena
called behavior and cognition. In what follows, we will review the
general systemic conditions that run for the nervous system.
GENERAL SYSTEMIC CONDITIONS
To understand the nervous system and the phenomena typically
associated with its functioning (e.g., perception, motor control,
language, and consciousness) it is crucial to examine its
peculiarities and distinctive features as a system. However,
it is equally important to consider the conditions that the
nervous system shares with all natural systems, living and not-
living, and according to which it must work. After all, what is
fascinating about the nervous system is that, being a natural
system (that is, a system that respects the laws, conditions,
and principles that rule and restrict every natural system),
it can generate phenomena as peculiar and exceptional as
perceptual experience, understanding, consciousness, language,
and intelligent reasoning.
This latter explanatory exercise is essential because, when
facing extremely complex explanatory problems, it is usually
tempting and easy to resort to the strategy of endowing
the components and explanatory machinery of the system
under study with the very special and complex properties
we want to explain. For instance, this was the case with
the explanation of the phenomenon of life. For an extended
period, it was assumed that the components of living beings
were unique in that they were endowed with a certain
kind of vital force or energy that was not present in the
components of inert objects (Bechtel and Richardson, 1998).
We tried to explain life by postulating that the matter of which
living beings are made was itself, somehow, living. Similarly,
when facing the problem of explaining cognitive and mental
phenomena, such as perception or intelligent reasoning, it is
tempting to think of the nervous system, its components, and
machinery, as if they themselves operated with protocognitive
(subpersonal, automatic, unconscious) cognitive mechanisms,
as if the nervous system was an epistemic agent dealing itself
with alleged problems of uncertainty and lack of information,
working on the base of hypotheses, inferences, predictions,
error detection, and looking for evidence and hypothesis
confirmation.
As the cases of biology and the problem of life teach us,
the strategy of projecting the properties and capacities of the
explanandum, even in a carefully sophisticated deflationary way,
Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 2 January 2022 | Volume 15 | Article 782781
Vicencio-Jimenez et al. A Naturalistic Approach to Explain Behavior
into the explanatory substratum itself does not lead to adequate
explanations. We think we would do better if we take the nervous
system not as a cognitive agent but as a physical machine (Ashby,
1947) and try to understand its operation according to the
conditions that rule every physical system in general. Doing
this does not mean, of course, ignoring the particular features
of the nervous system regarding its structure and organization;
it just means understanding that such specific features do not
set the nervous system apart from the rest of the natural
systems.
Before we further develop our argument for a strict
naturalistic approach to explain the emergence of behavior, we
consider it essential to lay out some foundational concepts, so
the reader can better consider the starting points. These points
are not meant to provide an exhaustive characterization of the
nervous system; far from that. However, combined, they should
help us understand, in broad terms, the way the nervous system
operates and generates some of the phenomena associated with
its functioning. We consider the following premises:
1. The nervous system is non-teleological. Its dynamics are
not driven by purposes or goals. As is the case with natural
systems in general, the dynamics of the nervous system
unfold following physical laws that are blind to purposes
or goals (Villalobos and Ward, 2015).
2. The nervous system is non-normative. Its dynamics are
not based on normative considerations such as what is (or
might be) good or bad, adequate, or inadequate, beneficial,
or harmful to the system itself or the organism. As is the
case with natural systems in general, the dynamics of the
nervous system unfold following physical laws that are
blind to normative values (Villalobos and Ward, 2015).
3. The interactions of the nervous system with its
surrounding systems, both intra- and extra-organism,
are structural (i.e., physical, chemical, energetic) in nature,
not epistemic, informative, or cognitive (Maturana, 2002).
The nervous system is not an epistemic agent that collects
and processes information, and its functioning is not
oriented to knowing (inferring, predicting, guessing)
anything (Villalobos, 2015).
4. The components of the nervous system, its neurons, and
networks work through strictly local interactions, without
‘‘having in view’’ distal states, either intra- or extra-
organism (Maturana and Varela, 1987).
5. The nervous system operates in its continuous structural
present, without ‘‘having in view’’ non-current states,
either past or future (Ashby, 1960; Maturana, 2008).
6. The nervous system, at the neuroscience scale of analysis,
behaves deterministically (Ashby, 1960; Maturana, 1980).
It is not a free agent that chooses, among a set of
possibilities, what to do. The nervous system does what
it does every instant because its structure at that instant
simply allows no other action.
7. The nervous system is an open thermodynamic system that
exchanges matter and energy with its surroundings.
8. The nervous system is a homeostatic system that, like
all homeostatic systems, maintains certain stability and
equilibrium in its physical parameters and shows the
capacity to restore them when they are disturbed within
specific ranges (Ashby, 1960).
9. Nervous systems, since their first formation in the
embryonal stage, grow and develop in the continuous
coupling, adaptation, and structural coherence with
their biological surroundings and the extra-organism
environment. This is a trivial condition for every system.
Everything that begins to exist does so because the
conditions for its emergence and existence are given. Every
system emerges adapted to, or in structural coherence with,
its surrounding conditions. This adaptation is conserved
while the system exists as such and lost when the system
ceases to exist.
10. A nervous system with normal anatomical and physiological
development is always coupled in a loop with:
(i) other physiological systems of the organism, such as
the endocrine, immune, cardiovascular, and digestive
systems.
(ii) the external environment through specialized sensory
organs and motor structures. Since these couplings
are functionally closed as feedback loops, the nervous
system always affects itself through them and thus
maintains its homeostasis. At the same time, since
these couplings arise in structural coherence and
adaptation from the beginning (recall point 9), the
self-centered homeostatic dynamics of the nervous
system result in the conservation of the adaptation of
the rest of the organism.
11. Complex enough nervous systems are hierarchically
organized as second-order homeostatic systems, therefore
exhibiting ultrastability and great flexibility (Ashby, 1960).
Hierarchy, in this context, implies that some of the
feedback loops of the nervous system (mentioned in point
10) operate at the first level of stability, whereas others
operate over them at a higher level. In this functional
organization, the higher level constraints but does not
eliminate the degrees of freedom of the lower level, so
the latter can deploy a considerable range of variability
in its dynamics to the extent that does not disturb the
equilibrium of the former. Because of this, from the point
of view of the higher level of homeostasis, the lower level
will appear to show not only adaptive or ‘‘useful’’ dynamics
but also ‘‘neutral’’ or ‘‘useless’’ ones.
In the following sections, we will elaborate on the EHP
considering this set of premises to produce a plausible explanation
for behavior and, ultimately, understanding. We will start arguing
how a naturalistic approach is required to disentangle proximate
causes (cell operation) from distal causes (organism operations).
Then, we will build over this conception to reinterpret neural
processing without goal or purpose. We will also evaluate
anticipatory behavior by means of the EHP and contrast it
with the FEP. Finally, we will offer an evolutionary argument
regarding how these apparently goal-directed-behaviors emerge
from non-teleological mechanisms. Moreover, we will discuss
how useless behavior may appear and may constitute a potential
adaptive advantage in evolutionary terms.
Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 3 January 2022 | Volume 15 | Article 782781
Vicencio-Jimenez et al. A Naturalistic Approach to Explain Behavior
SOME SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
ABOUT THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
One way to illustrate how neuronal interactions are restricted,
and therefore, locally driven interactions dynamics, is to realize
their context. When comparing the whole organism to its
component cells, or even organs, it can be noted that cells are
sensitive to completely different scales of physical phenomena
(Southern et al., 2008; Dada and Mendes, 2011). For instance,
swimming in a pool or the ocean makes little difference to an
experienced swimmer, whereas doing so in an aqueous solution
would be lethal to a cell (Pedersen et al., 2011). This becomes very
clear at the spatial and temporal scales (Engel, 1980; Southern
et al., 2008; Dada and Mendes, 2011; DiFrisco, 2017). For
example, at the chemical level, cells are most sensitive to their
direct environment, a space in the order of micrometers or
smaller, whereas we, as organisms, are sensitive to phenomena
in the order of millimeters and beyond. Regarding the time
scale, the difference is equally remarkable. Most of our cells are
replaced in our lifetime (DiFrisco, 2017), which means their time
scale is significantly shorter than ours.
We may argue the specifics of these differences, such as
up to what point the scales overlap, or how arbitrary it is
even to state that such scales exist. However, the core of that
observation goes beyond the scales themselves, the point being
the phenomenological operational closure of a whole human
being compared with a single cell is remarkably different. What
I see as a hamburger is not the same experience for a cell. On
the one hand, a cell is too tiny to perceive the hamburger as
a whole, but also its potential interactions with it are different
from those we would engage in. There is a difference between
how we perceive and the actions we may perform given such
perception; how we couple with objects in behavior. As such,
even if we would acknowledge that a neuron or neural network
could foresee something, it would be in a shorter time span and
based on their local interactions.
The global concept of how local interactions build up
hierarchically to behavior is depicted inFigure 1A , where we
intend to remark local interactions. For instance, cells may
interact directly with other cellular phenomena only. By doing
so, they are structurally coupled with the environment, and
if alive, maintain their energetic equilibrium and, therefore,
their operational closure (close-loop arrow). Hierarchically, these
local interactions may lead to population phenomena, such as
synchronization. Given the intricate codependence between the
actions of individual cells, a group of cells starts to behave
as a unity, like a fish shoal showing coordinated movements
(Herbert-Read, 2016), or eusocial insects, where survival is a
matter of the colony and not only of the individual (Gillooly
et al., 2010). In both examples, there are not unique individuals
signaling what has to be done to the colony, but rather local
interactions as one-to-one individuals produce these complex
phenomena. For instance, the fish shoal seems to move like a
wholly coordinated system, while this global property answers to
individual interactions of one fish considering the movements
of the fish right next to it (Herbert-Read et al., 2011). As
such, complex systemic phenomena may occur driven by local
interactions when sensorimotor actions of individual entities are
codependent and intimately coupled (Bonabeau et al., 1997). This
distinction is critical to avoid extrapolating system properties to
local components; however, it raises some challenges. Given our
aim to explain the emergence of behavior from a naturalistic
viewpoint, the difference in sensitivity is challenging for at least
two reasons. The first reason is the difficulty in establishing
relationships between these levels; if they do not perceive the
same phenomena, how are their dynamics aligned for survival?
This complicates the development of causal explanations in
biology. A similar situation was noticed 60 years ago by Ernst
Mayr (1961) when he established that virtually all explanations
of biological phenomena consisted of sets of proximate causes
and sets of ultimate causes (or distal, given our framework). In
Ernst Mayr’s work, he illustrates the difficulties in establishing
the causes of behavior, arguing that they can be attributed to
the environment, physiology (including molecular mechanisms),
or the interaction between the two. In this context, proximate
causes would be those that control the organism’s responses to
immediate environmental factors (such as the sunrise regulation
of the sleep-wake cycle in a mouse), while ultimate causes
would be those that have an impact on the organism’s survival
(such as increased nocturnal activity in mice that decreases the
probability of encountering predators). These ultimate causes are
rooted in evolutionary mechanisms and have been incorporated
into the system through generations of natural selection (Mayr,
1961). Therefore, under the EHP view, behavior emerges from
the intersection of coupled local interactions, which keep cells
alive, and evolutionary pressure, that permits local conditions
to remain coupled, if they do not jeopardize the life of the
whole organism (the distal cause). It is critical to notice that
the distal cause can be interpreted as a consequence of meeting
local requirements. Recalling point 6, ‘‘The nervous system
does what it does at every instant because its structure at that
instant simply allows no other action’’. In other words, distal
causes exist as a result of living beings staying alive coupled
with their environment and restricted to the evolutionary and
individual history that has determined particular properties of
their structure.
There is a second reason where local interactions are relevant.
For the organism to survive, the fundamental needs of all these
hierarchic levels must be met (Figure 1A). The specific needs of
different kinds of cells are varied and different from those of the
organisms they compose. Therefore, there are multiple layers or
levels of operational closure that are not strictly equivalent nor
overlapped and they must meet the entire organism requirements
to stay alive and coupled with its environment. This illustrates the
complex synchronization that must occur in the cell population
of such an organism to survive, as well as the close codependence
of a variety of cellular populations with remarkably different
requirements.
Now, an apparent contradiction appears. Despite the short
overlap of sensitivity to phenomena between the parts of our
body and the whole organism, we exhibit adaptative behaviors.
This supposed paradox has been solved mainly by assigning
functions aimed at the survival of the entire organism to different
parts of the body (Roux, 2014). However, this position usually
Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 4 January 2022 | Volume 15 | Article 782781
Vicencio-Jimenez et al. A Naturalistic Approach to Explain Behavior
FIGURE 1 | Schematic hierarchical structure and interactions for (A) a generic living organism, and (B) highlighting particular features of the nervous system. In (A)
self-closed arrows distinguish an operation closure denoting a certain level of independence of its internal operations. Bidirectional arrows for each self-closed arrows
denote the local interactions at each level (cell, system, organism), highlighting the relevance of local interactions. The cohesive and codependent interactions that
lead to the emergence of a system as a recognizable unit are represented by a bigger circle denoting a self-closed arrow containing those local interactions
(i.e., System, Organism). These systems may also interact with each other at a higher level (in terms of space and time) of interactions. Finally, the codependence of
these systems will ﬁnally produce what we recognize as an organism following the same rationale, while then interactions are established with what we traditionally
recognize as the environment (depicted by the upper curve). In the case of (B), we highlighted the sensorimotor loop (internal and external), as well as the structure
of sensorial structures, middle structures (traditionally referred to as processing related areas), and ﬁnally effectors. In this ﬁgure, we highlighted only muscles, but
effectors cover a major range of structures, such as glands.
omits the evolutionary process that led to those functions, while
also neglecting the survival of the cells that live in the organism.
It is critical to note that many of our cells die each day and that
each of these cells has different survival requirements and may
not act in alignment with the survival of the whole organism. This
is evident in pathologies such as cancer (Chaffer and Weinberg,
2011) and autoimmune diseases (Park and Kupper, 2015). We
tend to refer to these conditions as errors or problems of specific
systems and functions, overlooking that, since cells live in us,
but not for us, there is a possibility that these phenomena
may occur. As far as the global system (i.e., organism) meets
its requirements, codependence relations will keep the system
alive, regardless of other local interactions with no adaptive nor
maladaptive values that may emerge.
Our alternative approach would be to consider that each
cell meets its own requirements to survive. In this sense, it
is essential to assume that the cell, as an autopoietic unit,
can respond and exert control over its niche, but only within
its local environment. Thus, specific environmental conditions
that occur in localized regions of our body will set in motion
different cellular mechanisms. Since cells can only directly
influence that local environment, they can only meet their
requirements. Naturally, these local interactions may have distal
impacts (as Ernst Mayr conception); most of the time, when all
cells meet their requirements, they indirectly end up meeting
ours. As such, behavior can be considered an emergent property
derived from the individual actions of cells that lead to their
survival, and ultimately to ours. These two levels must be
aligned for the whole organism to survive; however, there is
a possibility of mismatch where some are neutral (without
significant consequences) while others give rise to what we call
pathology.
This different approach can be described as an interaction of
parallel causes and requirements nested in cells and organisms,
in the sense that the phenomena present in individual cells
mirror a distal effect on the whole organism andvice versa.
Therefore, we may explain behavior from the viewpoint of the
entire organism or the interactions of its cells. However, a more
comprehensive approach would be to track cellular interactions
up to the mirrored effect on the organisms without neglecting
that the proximal causes affecting each layer or level are aligned
for survival. As such, the same phenomenon can present a
Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 5 January 2022 | Volume 15 | Article 782781
Vicencio-Jimenez et al. A Naturalistic Approach to Explain Behavior
different impact on the organism and the cell populations within.
For instance, covering the head with the limbs to block a
hit to the head is adaptive for organisms, yet limb cells will
die as a result, and the behavior would not be adaptive for
them.
At this point, we may start asking which is the most relevant
aspect of cells’ survival. Naturally, energy management is critical
for survival in any cell, as they must balance expenditure
with income and maintain an adequate reserve to cope with
environmental restrictions. If we consider a cell that lives within
an organism and that has an evident impact over its behavior,
such as a neuron, this premise stands. For neurons to survive,
they must properly manage their energy budget. Problems of the
organism, such as avoiding injuries, coupling with stressful work,
dealing with the death of a close one, and so on, are not part of
the proximal phenomena stressing a single neuron. Of course,
those phenomena have stimuli transduction into local neural
requirements: energy demand imposition. Therefore, neurons
will deploy mechanisms to couple with their local requirements
and, hopefully, they will solve the organism’s problems as well. As
such, when describing how behavior emerges, we should always
map the differences between the organism and cellular domain
of interactions. For instance, Vergara et al. (2019) described
perceptual stimuli as mapped into physiology with different
impacts at each level. An organism may just be looking at
something. At the same time, transduction sets electromagnetic
waves of the visual spectrum into action potentials, which in turn
produce a cascade effect all over the nervous system, impacting
the energetic demands of neurons and glia (Vergara et al., 2019).
Depending on how demanding this stimulus is energetically,
neurons may regulate their synaptic weights (Barral and Reyes,
2016), producing a new functional network. This new functional
network will, in turn, activate muscles leading to visible behavior
that may change the stimulus (e.g., closing the eyes).
This rationale is what we depict in Figure 1B , where we
remark the particular conditions of the nervous system. All
sensory inputs, driven from sensory organs, internal or external,
are activated by stimulation that impose energetic demands on
the nervous system. The system can affect that energy imposition
by effector activity, such as muscle activation, among others. As
such, closing the eyes will reduce the amount of spent energy
driven by visual perception. It is also relevant to notice that for
a single neuron, or even for a central nervous system neural
network, it makes almost no difference if the signal arrives from
interoceptive receptors or perception organs. The stimulation
received is, in physical and chemical terms, the same. However,
as previously implied in point 11, the feedback loops established
by the nervous system through perceptual and interoceptive
structures are hierarchically organized in such a way that their
respective dynamics get coordinated. Also, we must not forget
that the organisms not only interact with the environment
through the nervous system, and that the nervous system is
also coupled with other physiological systems, obeying the same
rationale of local interactions.
In this framework, the energy balance mechanisms of the
cells have a consequential impact on physiology resulting in
the emergence of behavior. At the same time, since the cellular
and whole-organism levels are analogous to nested layers or
levels, the behavior itself will impact not only the experience
of the whole organism but also the cells that compose it. It
may be the case that only some of the cells are affected, which
remarks the need of recognizing that the same phenomena may
impact differently the whole organism and regions (cells) within.
Also relevant is the fact that neurons cannot directly experience
the stimuli that trigger organism behaviors. Once sensorial
transduction is made, only proximal phenomena such as action
potential, lactate transporter activation, synaptic modulations,
and so on, are observable. In other words, cells such as neurons
are never solving a mathematical problem, or recognizing a face,
but are only solving energy needs required for their survival.
REINTERPRETING NEURAL PROCESSING
The notion that behavior is not inside the machine is notably
exemplified in the experiments in ‘‘synthetic psychology’’ of
Braitenberg (1986). He presented how simple mechanisms
may lead to complex behaviors and the illusion of complex
cognitive processing. The complexity may be loaned from the
environment, while internal mechanisms can stay simple. We
usually think of neural mechanisms as complex and difficult to
assess, based on the complexity of behavior. Let us assume for
a moment that it might be the case that neural mechanisms are
relatively simple and that most of the complexity we see in our
behavior is loaned from our environment. Is there an experiment
like Braitenberg’s, in which we can test real neurons?
Novellino et al. (2007) and Tessadori et al. (2013) presented
an experiment resembling Braitenberg’s vehicles using neuron
cultures (actual neurons, not artificial neural networks). In this
setup, a cart decodes distance to objects using a firing rate
paradigm, and then the same paradigm is used to code back the
wheels’ speed independently. If the cart crashes, a stimulation
burst of 20 Hz for 2 s is delivered (Tessadori et al., 2013). Under
this protocol, the neuron culture learns to avoid obstacles. Thus,
as external observers, we may be tempted to say that the cart
does not like to crash, and it, therefore, learns to avoid obstacles.
Even more, we are tempted to say that the goal of such behavior
is to avoid crashes. However, that stimulation pattern is known
to trigger plasticity (Madhavan et al., 2007; Chiappalone et al.,
2008; le Feber et al., 2010). We may also argue that each time
the cart crashes, it induces plasticity, changing the functional
network. Considering how the experiment is set up, the changes
will keep occurring unless crashes are avoided. Once no more
crashes occur, no more changes in the network are expected.
In other words, a functional neural network will keep changing
until an ‘‘obstacle avoidance’’ structure emerges, and we will be
tempted to say that the neural culture learned to avoid obstacles.
Critically, the functional network does not appear by means
of an impact-avoidance goal, but as an effect derived from the
energy demands posed by the stimulation that drives plasticity.
Our proximate cause was energy demands, while the distal effect
was avoiding obstacles. Importantly, this effect is structurally
determined by how the wiring and stimulation conditions were
set to the vehicle controlled by the neuron culture, meaning
that a wider set of ‘‘learnings’’ can emerge if the structure
Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 6 January 2022 | Volume 15 | Article 782781
Vicencio-Jimenez et al. A Naturalistic Approach to Explain Behavior
changes. Under this framework, it is rather useless to think that,
at the neuron level, a particular neuron or set of neurons are
‘‘processing obstacle avoidance’’, or that there is an obstacle
avoidance network in the neuronal culture. At the level of the
organism, we can be tempted to use this approach, and it might
be even helpful in some contexts. Nonetheless, to explain how
the vehicle learns, we must consider that individual neurons
deal with significant energy demands that trigger plasticity as a
compensation mechanism (Vergara et al., 2019), which produces
the avoidance of obstacles as emergent behavior.
It is possible to establish that, in proximal terms, neurons
must efficiently solve their energy management. As depicted in
Figure 2 , we expect that a neural network in equilibrium will
lose its energy balance driven by external stimuli. The energy
imbalance will propagate through the network according to
its structural constraints. Since most neural connections with
different regions are bidirectional, the system will generate a
global answer (as observers, we may declare it a coordinated
answer). Eventually, this will get to the effectors (full propagation
is achieved). At that moment, the organism will be able to take
action as a whole system to impact the input stimulus that has
disturbed the energy balance. It is critical to notice that, in the
meantime, local mechanisms of single neurons are triggered to
couple with this increment in energy demand as well. Within this
close-loop structure, the actions taken by the entire organism, as
well as those taken by individual cells, will allow a new energy
equilibrium to be achieved, which will be a novel functional
neural structure associated with a novel behavior.
From the previous argument highlighting energy as a key
regulatory element, makes sense considering neurons’ proximal
context as the trigger of neuron regulation. Neurons are
extremely sensitive to oxygen deprivation (Ames, 2000) and
the central nervous system possesses small glycogen reserves
(Brown and Ransom, 2007). Neurons answer to energy demands
(neural activity) by outsourcing their energy needs to the glia
(Weber and Barros, 2015), which will trigger the neurovascular
coupling associated with neural activity (Sokoloff, 2008; Schulz
et al., 2012; Robinson and Jackson, 2016), followed by increased
glucose uptake and glycolytic rate of astrocytes (Magistretti and
Allaman, 2018). In addition, neuronal mitochondria increase
ATP synthesis in response to an increment in synaptic stimuli
(Jekabsons and Nicholls, 2004; Connolly et al., 2014; Rangaraju
et al., 2014; Toloe et al., 2014; Lange et al., 2015). These are
just the early responses in the range of hours, as the synaptic
scaling ends balancing to a homeostatic level of neurons’ activity
(Barral and Reyes, 2016), reducing the energy cost of the activity
increment. An increment in stimulation is expected to produce
long-term network modularization (Novellino et al., 2007).
Interestingly enough, when significant downscaling occurs, a
few synaptic weights (dendritic spines) will increase (El-Boustani
et al., 2018; Jungenitz et al., 2018). As such, while we have
only described the proximal actions of neurons, they have a
vast impact on the neural networks and therefore behavior. It is
plausible to observe neural processing as an emergent property
rooted in proximal cells requirements.
Up to this point, we have been able to rephrase neural
processing without purpose or so-called ‘‘goal-oriented
behaviors’’. Our explanation has also been faithful to a structural
determinism, meaning that behavior in the vehicle (i.e., neuronal
culture) emerges as a result of neurons doing the actions
determined by their properties and structure. So far, introducing
volition or desires in this context would be to acknowledge
openly that a culture of neurons shares the same properties
we usually attribute to a whole organism. However, does this
reinterpretation lead to new implications?
The most obvious is the reinterpretation of key phenomena
into local interactions. For instance, neural activity, usually
seen as neural processing, would be interpreted as energy
expenditure, as an environmental pressure for a neuron, which
forces it to activate mechanisms to balance its energy budget.
Otherwise, it dies. Plasticity, classically viewed as a learning
mechanism (please note how a molecular mechanism has a whole
system property; learning), would be reinterpreted as a coupling
mechanism of neurons to deal with incoming energetic demands
from presynaptic neurons. As stated in Vergara et al. (2019),
the synaptic gain will change to match a homeostatic energy
level. This immediately sets some empirical implications. For
instance, synaptic scaling should answer to stimulation, but also
to energy availability. Therefore, changes in glucose availability
in a neuronal culture should change the dynamics of classic
synaptic scaling protocols. Specifically, synaptic scaling should be
higher in the case of less glucose availability (for more empirical
predictions, see Vergara et al., 2019).
Another consequence of viewing neuronal processing as an
emergent property of individual neurons displaying mechanisms
that allow them to stay alive under different energy pressures
is that not everything neurons do is helpful to the organism.
In other words, since neurons are only solving their local
requirements, their actions may lead to the emergence of useless
behaviors. This means that part of the neural network activity,
which can respond to the continuous activity of multiple stimuli,
will lead to the appearance of behaviors with no apparent
usefulness and that may even be maladaptive. This is necessarily
the consequence of a codependent system governed by local
actions. Each component solves its requirements as part of
its condition of existence, but once they are solved, other
harmless actions may occur as a kind of debris that results
from the operational closure. It is crucial to notice that as living
beings we do not need a perfect functional coupling with the
environment; it must be just good enough to survive. If we
consider further the hierarchic structure, even relevant actions
for survival at a single cell level may have useless or undesired
impacts at the whole-organism level. As long as survival is not
immediately compromised, e.g., as far as physiologically critical
homeostatic systems are not driven away from equilibrium,
these mismatches may freely occur. This consequence frees us
from the need to include a function in every behavior we have.
Many of them can be helpful for our survival and others may
not, but above all, given the degree of freedom allowed by
the hierarchical organization of the neural-body-environment
homeostatic mechanisms, we can have neutral behaviors from an
adaptative viewpoint.
This last point is critical since the degree of behavioral
flexibility increases the probability of producing neutral
Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 7 January 2022 | Volume 15 | Article 782781
Vicencio-Jimenez et al. A Naturalistic Approach to Explain Behavior
FIGURE 2 | A simpliﬁed version of Figure 1Bdepicting temporal dynamics driven by external stimuli that push the system out of its energetic equilibrium. This
ﬁgure does not intend to be an exhaustive description of the temporal dynamics of this process, rather to depict some critical features of such dynamics. In
particular, that the energy demand imposition of the initial stimulus would only be detected by the sensory regions, and then propagate into the remaining areas. We
also emphasize that these regions are bidirectionally related, so that, before the behavior occurs, it is expected that some energy compensations of single neurons
and neural networks will take place. When the system is in full propagation of the energy demand imposed by the environment, a behavior will take place impacting
the perceived environment. This will have an effect on the sensory areas. However, the impact is not immediate, and it will return to a propagation process in which
the mechanisms of all levels (neuron, neural networks, organism) will ﬁnd a novel equilibrium.
behaviors and deleterious ones. Thus, it is not surprising that
animals with high behavioral flexibility are associated with
greater effort and parenting times during ontogeny (Isler and
van Schaik, 2009, 2012; Barton and Capellini, 2011; Heldstab
et al., 2019; Uomini et al., 2020). One only needs to observe how
a toddler relates to its environment to discover that many of
our behaviors during infancy put our survival or fitness at peril.
Parental care or parenting allows us to buffer this flexibility,
allowing us to stay alive. Conversely, flexibility also allows us to
increase fitness by adapting to the environment during ontogeny,
unlike less flexible animals requiring phylogenetic mechanisms
of change to adapt.
BUILDING UP TO COMPLEX BEHAVIORS
Behavioral flexibility by means of EHP is a powerful concept, as
it explains fast changes in behavior during ontogeny, but it also
allows the test-retest rationale to operate. As far as the test-retest
rationale follows the restrictions imposed by single-cell energy
management, learning can emerge. We expect that this flexibility
is what ultimately gives rise to the most complex cognitive
phenomena, such as understanding. Specifically, what we refer
to as useless behavior can be interpreted out of the teleological
paradigm as behavioral flexibility. Those apparently useless
behaviors may find their usefulness when an environmental
pressure is relieved by this behavior, or they may never find
their usefulness from the observer’s position. From a naturalistic
approach, this is just flexibility to couple with the environment
following point 8, describing the nervous system as a homeostatic
system that will maintain certain stability and equilibrium and
restore it to a certain extent.
In this view, complex cognitive phenomena emerge from this
hierarchical flexibility of the system. These more sophisticated
cognitive phenomena are vastly discussed and modeled using
the Free Energy Principle (Friston, 2010). How does EHP
stand in contrast to FEP? The FEP is an organism-based
approach that considers volition as a critical element, especially
when regarding aspects such as understanding (Yufik and
Friston, 2016), as it distinguishes lower forms of learning,
allowing the introduction of cognitive models. Therefore, as
an initial difference, we noticed that FEP rather omits neuron
requirements, assuming them as chronically met. Secondly, it
Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 8 January 2022 | Volume 15 | Article 782781
Vicencio-Jimenez et al. A Naturalistic Approach to Explain Behavior
assumes the presence of goal-oriented behaviors, volition, and
purpose, which is to be expected if starting from a whole
organism viewpoint.
Although there are obvious differences between these two
perspectives, especially since the FEP contains teleological
elements and considers the nervous system as an epistemic
agent (points 1 and 3 of ‘‘General Systemic Conditions’’ section),
Yufik’s proposal (Yufik, 2013, 2019; Yufik and Friston, 2016)
is very similar to the EHP at the neural network level. He
developed the idea of how neural assemblies (or packets)
would appear, producing functional networks which allow
understanding to emerge. The core idea envisions the mind
as a cartographer mapping the environment, similar to classic
cognitive perspectives (Bateson, 2015), where modularization of
functional neural activity will allow differences to be made. In
order to establish that two objects are different, a difference
in the functional network should emerge (different packets or
sets of packets) to allow the recognition of such distinction.
Following our rationale, the critical question is what local
mechanism is driving the emergence of those distinctions.
During the works of this thermodynamic conception of
cognition, there is an acknowledgment of the relevance of energy
in modulating the packets’ emergence in this proposal (Yufik,
2013, 2019; Yufik and Friston, 2016). For instance, cortical tone
(temperature of this thermodynamic formalization), which can
be rephrased as energy demands using EHP, is critical in how
the system will react towards the equilibrium by FEP conception
(Yufik, 2013).
This is a critical aspect, as in this FEP-driven proposal
energy conditions modify the neural functional structure to
produce a novel equilibrium. This conceptually very similar to
the EHP, as depicted inFigure 2, achieves a novel equilibrium
by a new energetic demand (i.e., cortical tone). Even more
interesting is that in Yufik’s work (Yufik, 2013, 2019; Yufik
and Friston, 2016) modularization is expected from a learning
process, the same process reported by Tessadori et al. (2013)
and Novellino et al. (2007), which we have explained from
an EHP viewpoint above. This role of energy management is
even more explicit in the following communications (Yufik,
2019), mainly focused on the demand or energy expenditure and
availability. Therefore, both approaches find common ground
in the middle, acknowledging that local neuron requirements
(i.e., energy management) are critical for modularization to
occur, leading to cognitive distinctions that will ultimately
produce understanding.
It is relevant to notice that EHP and FEP are two sides of
the same coin. Following the parallel conception of organism
vs. cell community approach, all conceptions derived from FEP
could be mapped in EHP terms andvice versa. Naturally, as
we get closer to cellular processes, FEP is less precise on its
implications, and when getting closer to high cognitive functions,
EHP is rather vague. However, reasonable efforts can be made
to understand what is happening at cellular and physiological
levels when we describe the cognitive mechanism. For instance,
one challenging explanation to be made from the EHP side is
anticipatory behavior. How can neurons caring about their local
needs solve upcoming organism events?
One key aspect of anticipatory behavior is that it must be
learned first. In other words, it is not anticipating anything, it
is rather re-evoking structural history. This means that most
predictions we make are based upon past experiences. Therefore,
we avoid pain, as we have previously experienced pain. Similar
to what we described in Tessadori’s vehicle case (Tessadori et al.,
2013), energy demands derived from the painful stimulation lead
to restructuration, allowing pain avoidance to occur (rephrased
as reducing surprise by FEP means). If we focused not on the
result but on the learning phase, we would notice that consistent
unrelated stimulus (e.g., a light turning on, an acoustic event, or
a similar signal event) is followed by pain.
Light, sound, and pain produce energy demands through
perception. Nonetheless, the pain has a durable effect, which
means a long-lasting energy demand situation. Also, its intensity
is directly related to the amount of damage (Dubin and
Patapoutian, 2010). Therefore, that is the critical stimulation to
be avoided by means of local neuron requirements.
When we focus on neural activity during situations of these
characteristics, we observe that both neural activities, the one
derived from the upcoming pain signal and the one directly
derived from pain, begin to fire closer in time through learning
(Urien et al., 2018). The overall activity appears to be the same,
but the temporal aspect change. Basically, now the signal triggers
both the signal-related activity and the originally pain-driven
avoidance behavior. The critical aspect here is that the signal that
anticipates pain does not mean pain itself, but in neural activity,
the signal packet (assembly) will fire just before the avoidance
behavior packet. Following the logic offire together, wire together,
the avoidance packet will ultimately be activated without the
pain but with the signal packet, meaning the fusion of these two
packets. Please note that this explanation does not involve mental
manipulations yet as the ones suggested by FEP, and we can still
be faithful to our premises.
From EHP, the fusion of these neural activities into one
module that would lead to the so-called anticipatory behavior,
is driven by the same rationale observed inFigure 2. Basically,
the initial trial will deploy many behaviors that will not be
useful to keep the equilibrium, while at the same time the
propagation of the energy demand imposed by pain will, in
consequence, functionally restructure the network with each
iteration. Following the same proposed mechanism for the
vehicle controlled by a neuronal culture, at some point behavior
will satisfy the condition of approaching neurons to a novel
equilibrium. During this central energy regulation, with each
iteration the best ‘‘pain-avoidance’’ structure will be selected
until the predictive behavior is settled. These changes may even
follow a random structure change, and they would still work.
However, neural mechanisms such as synaptic reinforcement
by fire together, wire together (Abbott and Nelson, 2000), play
a critical role for this to happen efficiently. Considering that
the EHP reinterprets these plastic mechanisms as coping energy
mechanisms of neurons, we are able to explain these phenomena
without yet needing to call for complex mental scenarios.
Naturally, this explanation does not cover more sophisticated
behaviors like planning, which under a classic view require
volitional manipulation of information. However, it sheds light
Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 9 January 2022 | Volume 15 | Article 782781
Vicencio-Jimenez et al. A Naturalistic Approach to Explain Behavior
on how, starting from cellular communities, ‘‘goal-directed’’
behaviors can be explained leaving the goal as the consequence,
not the cause. Neurons don’t even realize that the animal
was submitted to pain; they just react according to their local
requirements. It is we who, as observers, are tempted to say that
the animal learns to anticipate the aversive stimulus. Even more
relevant is the fact that as we show anticipatory behavior, we may
be blind to the actual causes that led to this apparent anticipatory
behavior by neglecting history, which under the EHP view is
no more than an expression of an organism coupled with its
environment where its particular history defines the behaviors
that will be deployed when observing the signal related to pain.
Under this context, we have given an explanation of how an
organism can act in the prediction of hazard, without actually
predicting it. Local neural properties allow these phenomena
to occur without incorporating purpose, mental model, or
further mental scenarios. Notably, FEP and EHP, despite
their differences in starting points (and, therefore, conceptual
frameworks), share similar predictions on how neural networks
would operate. Distinctions are made on what produces those
changes. Another relevant difference of our approach is that
neurons can fulfill their requirements without solving the
problem of the whole organism but never endangering the
life of the organism (at least not immediately). Therefore, the
behavioral flexibility given by the impact left by neurons when
solving their needs could have a negative, neutral, or positive
impact, which means that the neurons may find local energy
homeostasis attractors that satisfy their requirements but not
necessarily the organism’s requirements. However, if so, why
does it seem that they are almost always positive (hence the
teleological need to indicate their function)?
AN EVOLUTIONARY PERSPECTIVE ON
THE COUPLING OF DIFFERENT LEVELS
OF OPERATIONAL CLOSURES
We see what remains, not what has been. During the evolutionary
history of living beings, most species have disappeared, have
become extinct (Newman, 1997). In fact, the species that are alive
today represent less than 1% of the historical total (Newman,
1997; Jablonski, 2004). This makes it risky to use evidence only
from modern animals to explain the relationship between the
cellular and whole-organism levels of organization. On the other
hand, virtually all present-day animal body plans date at least
back to the Cambrian explosion (CE), an event that occurred
more than 500 million years ago (Maloof et al., 2010). While
it is still a matter of debate, it is possible to propose that near
that time window, a level of animal diversification and radiation
occurred that had not been seen before and has not been seen
since (Keijzer, 2015; Trestman, 2013).
Interestingly, this period has also been ascribed as when
metazoans with complex active bodies appeared (Trestman,
2013). These organisms are defined by having: (i) articulated
appendages; (ii) many degrees of freedom of controlled
movement; (iii) true senses (with specialized organs such as
eyes); (iv) sense-guided motility; and (v) anatomical capacity
for object manipulation (Trestman, 2013). The appearance
of metazoans probably occurred at least 200 million years
before the CE (Erwin, 2015; Dohrmann and Wörheide,
2017), and the nervous system probably appeared during
the Ediacaran period (635 million years ago). In simpler
metazoans with low-complexity nervous systems, synchrony
between the neuronal and organism levels was probably much
easier to achieve than in animals with complex active bodies.
Movement is not yet a problem for those animals. Thus, it
is feasible that, during the initial evolution of the nervous
system, a limiting element was the alignment between the
neuronal level and that of the whole organism. Once this
occurred, the space for possible radiation and diversification
opened up.
In ontogenetic terms, the reality is similar. In animals, the
highest mortality rates are usually seen early in life (Caughley,
1966), when their individual-environment relationships are still
being established and they tend to have much more behavioral
flexibility. Even in our species, this reality is not far off, for it has
not been long since most of our offspring died during the first
3 years of life (Volk and Atkinson, 2013). The problem lies in
that we often only consider its present condition when observing
an organism such as ourselves and its direct relationship with
the environment, ignoring its phylogenetic and ontogenetic
history. Under this perspective, most cellular phenomena are
aligned with their whole-organism functions. This may lead
to the interpretation that the proportion of misaligned events
between these levels of the organization is negligible or almost
nonexistent. Thus, we only see what has worked for survival,
while counterexamples of instances where cellular phenomena
are misaligned with organisms vanish. In other words, under
this view, we are incurring a survival bias, where we focus
only on the instances where cellular and whole-organism levels
overcame a selection process and overlook those that did not.
This can lead us to false conclusions, such as overrepresenting
aligned states or assuming cellular levels have functions for
our survival.
This also translates into a tradeoff between flexibility and
survivability. Higher degrees of freedom and higher levels of
flexibility allow the emergence of novel adaptations, which
increase the organism’s fitness. This context can also explain why
larger nervous systems (brains with more neurons) are associated
with greater behavioral richness. A larger number of neurons
leads to a greater diversity of local responses/solutions and
greater behavioral flexibility. However, on the other hand, there
may be a maximum of possible degrees of freedom before the
number of misalignments between cellular and whole-organism
levels can remain functional.
Another point to consider is that not necessarily every lack of
synchrony is maladaptive. There is the possibility that some of
the neuronal activity that is not fully aligned with the organism
is ‘‘neutral.’’ Thus, analogous to models of neutral evolution, it
is feasible that a non-trivial proportion of what neurons do to
solve their local energy requirements has no significant impact
on the organism’s survival. It is possible to postulate that the less
fundamental to survival a behavior is, the more neutral activity
there is. That is, the less essential behaviors probably allow for
Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 10 January 2022 | Volume 15 | Article 782781
Vicencio-Jimenez et al. A Naturalistic Approach to Explain Behavior
FIGURE 3 | Schematic of the historic progression of organism coupling with their environment leading to a diversity of organisms (phylogenetic mechanisms) and
behavioral ﬂexibility (ontogenetic mechanisms). Evolution may generate important changes in organism morphology, producing major differences between different
species (depicted with different shapes and colors). Ontogenetic mechanisms will be constrained by phylogenetic history but will produce a large number of potential
behaviors from which only a subsample will appear. The behaviors that appear during ontogeny will depend on the individual life history of each organism that will lead
iteratively to different functional structures (depicted as change in color but not shape), which will ultimately produce different behaviors and functional constraints.
less alignment between levels. This, in turn, would increase the
presence of behavioral richness or ‘‘polymorphisms’’ in those
behaviors. Specifically, when both the adaptive value and the
survival hazard are low, neutral behavior emerges (Figure 3).
Finally, it is critical to realize that, under this notion, behaviors
are not goal-orientedper se. Many may appear as goal-directed,
as they are conditions of existence of the system (e.g., breathing).
Under our scope, breathing organisms stay alive, therefore
exist. However, breathing was never designed or deliberately
addressed to meet the oxygen requirements of the organism.
When we remove the goal rationale of structures and behavior,
the evolutive process in which behavior emerges loses its need
for teleological explanation. As such, the brain or areas within
were not designed to solve specific problems. Instead, in meeting
their own requirements, cells satisfy the organism’s requirements
too; if not, survival is compromised. When most cells living in the
cellular community meet their requirements, the organisms will
do so. It is simply the condition of existence of such a community.
Behavioral diversity and flexibility emerge within these messy
interactions of individual cells acting locally and producing distal
effects that may not even affect them directly.
FINAL REMARKS
When we observe a single cell acting in an anticipatory fashion
(e.g., Shirakawa, 2006), we avoid attributing it to a sense of
Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 11 January 2022 | Volume 15 | Article 782781
Vicencio-Jimenez et al. A Naturalistic Approach to Explain Behavior
volition, or any epistemic or informational operation. We focus
on its local mechanisms which result in such anticipatory
behavior. Avoiding it is reasonable, as including it obscures the
mechanisms, and we also recognize the cell as a physical system
determined by the mechanisms governing it. For some reason,
when coming to human beings, we fail to recognize them in
such a way. This is so dramatic, that besides EHP, we have no
knowledge of another integrative explicative proposal of behavior
using a strict naturalistic approach.
FEP is probably the most sophisticated and flexible proposal
explaining human behavior as an integrative framework.
However, it uses a strong epistemic rationale to explain
behavior. This leads to assigning volition to all living beings
(or even dissipative systems) or stating that the concept is
only applicable for certain systems such as human beings.
Despite the differences, it is notable that the phenomena
described at the neural network level are quite similar in both
proposals, meaning that both recognize more or less the same
events as relevant to explain behavior. The causes of those
events are different depending on which proposal framework is
used.
We understand that intending to explain behavior and most
sophisticated forms of it, such as understanding, is a major
challenge for EHP. However, we consider that it is a required
academic exercise in our current framework of neuroscience.
As we have stated above, goals can easily emerge as observer
assignation once the system is coupled with its environment,
but from an evolutionary perspective, adaptations do not appear
to solve a problem; they just appear, and they are preserved
due to advantageous (or at least non-deleterious) impacts. In
other words, focusing on the goal may obscure the actual
mechanisms that produce the phenomena we look forward to
understanding.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The original contributions presented in the study are included in
the article, further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding
author.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
SV-J, MV, and RV developed the initial general argument. All
authors contributed to all the drafts; nonetheless, each author
did special contributions to different sections. MV formalized
the general systemic conditions. RV contributed in the neural
processing and building up to behavior sections. SV-J developed
the evolutionary perspective. RV and PM edited the final version.
All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted
version.
FUNDING
MV’s contribution to this article was supported by the Agencia
Nacional de Investigación y Desarrollo, ANID, from a grant
FONDECYT REGULAR 1191477. PM’s contribution to this
article was supported by Proyect ICN09_015.
REFERENCES
Abbott, L. F., and Nelson, S. B. (2000). Synaptic plasticity: taming the beast.Nat.
Neurosci. 3, 1178–1183. doi: 10.1038/81453
Ames, A., 3rd (2000). CNS energy metabolism as related to function.Brain Res.
Rev. 34, 42–68. doi: 10.1016/s0165-0173(00)00038-2
Ashby, W. R. (1947). The nervous system as physical machine; with
special reference to the origin of adaptive behaviour. Mind 56, 44–59.
doi: 10.1093/mind/lvi.221.44
Ashby, W. R. (1960).Design for a Brain, 2nd edition. London: Chapman & Hall.
Barral, J., and Reyes, A. D. (2016). Synaptic scaling rule preserves excitatory-
inhibitory balance and salient neuronal network dynamics.Nat. Neurosci.19,
1690–1696. doi: 10.1038/nn.4415
Barton, R. A., and Capellini, I. (2011). Maternal investment, life histories and the
costs of brain growth in mammals.Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A108, 6169–6174.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1019140108
Bateson, G. (2015). Form, substance and difference. ETC: A
Review of General Semantics 72, 90–104. Available online at:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/24761998.
Bechtel, W., and Richardson, R. C. (1998). ‘‘Vitalism,’’ inRoutledge Encyclopedia
of Philosophy, ed E. Craig (London: Routledge), 639–643.
Bonabeau, E., Theraulaz, G., Deneubourg, J. L., Aron, S., and Camazine, S.
(1997). Self-organization in social insects. Trends Ecol. Evol. 12, 188–193.
doi: 10.1016/s0169-5347(97)01048-3
Braitenberg, V. (1986).Vehicles: Experiments in Synthetic Psychology.Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Brown, A. M., and Ransom, B. R. (2007). Astrocyte glycogen and brain energy
metabolism. Glia 55, 1263–1271. doi: 10.1002/glia.20557
Caughley, G. (1966). Mortality patterns in mammals. Ecology 47, 906–918.
doi: 10.2307/1935638
Chaffer, C. L., and Weinberg, R. A. (2011). A perspective on cancer cell metastasis.
Science 331, 1559–1564. doi: 10.1126/science.1203543
Chiappalone, M., Massobrio, P., and Martinoia, S. (2008). Network plasticity in
cortical assemblies. Eur. J. Neurosci. 28, 221–237. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.
2008.06259.x
Connolly, N. M. C., Dussmann, H., Anilkumar, U., Huber, H. J., and
Prehn, J. H. M. (2014). Single-cell imaging of bioenergetic responses to
neuronal excitotoxicity and oxygen and glucose deprivation.J. Neurosci. 34,
10192–10205. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3127-13.2014
Dada, J. O., and Mendes, P. (2011). Multi-scale modelling and simulation in
systems biology.Integr. Biol.3, 86–96. doi: 10.1039/c0ib00075b
DiFrisco, J. (2017). Time scales and levels of organization.Erkenntnis 82, 795–818.
doi: 10.1007/s10670-016-9844-4
Dohrmann, M., and Wörheide, G. (2017). Dating early animal evolution
using phylogenomic data. Sci. Rep. 7:3599. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017
-03791-w
Dubin, A. E., and Patapoutian, A. (2010). Nociceptors: the sensors
of the pain pathway. J. Clin. Invest. 120, 3760–3772. doi: 10.1172/
JCI42843
El-Boustani, S., Ip, J. P. K., Breton-Provencher, V., Knott, G. W., Okuno, H.,
Bito, H., et al. (2018). Locally coordinated synaptic plasticity of visual
cortex neurons in vivo . Science 360, 1349–1354. doi: 10.1126/science.
aao0862
Engel, G. L. (1980). The clinical application of the biopsychosocial model.Am.
J. Psychiatry137, 535–544. doi: 10.1176/ajp.137.5.535
Erwin, D. H. (2015). Early metazoan life: divergence, environment and ecology.
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci.370:20150036. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2015.0036
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory?Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 11, 127–138. doi: 10.1038/nrn2787
Friston, K. J., and Stephan, K. E. (2007). Free-energy and the brain.Synthese 159,
417–458. doi: 10.1007/s11229-007-9237-y
Gillooly, J. F., Hou, C., and Kaspari, M. (2010). Eusocial insects as
superorganisms: insights from metabolic theory. Commun. Integr. Biol. 3,
360–362. doi: 10.4161/cib.3.4.11887
Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 12 January 2022 | Volume 15 | Article 782781
Vicencio-Jimenez et al. A Naturalistic Approach to Explain Behavior
Heldstab, S. A., Isler, K., Burkart, J. M., and van Schaik, C. P. (2019). Allomaternal
care, brains and fertility in mammals: who cares matters.Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol.
73:71. doi: 10.1007/s00265-019-2684-x
Herbert-Read, J. E. (2016). Understanding how animal groups achieve coordinated
movement. J. Exp. Biol.219, 2971–2983. doi: 10.1242/jeb.129411
Herbert-Read, J. E., Perna, A., Mann, R. P., Schaerf, T. M., Sumpter, D. J., and
Ward, A. J. (2011). Inferring the rules of interaction of shoaling fish.Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U S A108, 18726–18731. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1109355108
Isler, K., and van Schaik, C. P. (2009). Why are there so few smart mammals (but
so many smart birds)?Biol. Lett.5, 125–129. doi: 10.1098/rsbl.2008.0469
Isler, K., and van Schaik, C. P. (2012). Allomaternal care, life history and
brain size evolution in mammals. J. Hum. Evol. 63, 52–63. doi: 10.
1016/j.jhevol.2012.03.009
Jablonski, D. (2004). Extinction: past and present. Nature 427:589.
doi: 10.1038/427589a
Jekabsons, M. B., and Nicholls, D. G. (2004). in situ respiration and bioenergetic
status of mitochondria in primary cerebellar granule neuronal cultures exposed
continuously to glutamate.J. Biol. Chem.279, 32989–33000. doi: 10.1074/jbc.
M401540200
Jungenitz, T., Beining, M., Radic, T., Deller, T., Cuntz, H., Jedlicka, P., et al. (2018).
Structural homo- and heterosynaptic plasticity in mature and adult newborn
rat hippocampal granule cells.Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A115, E4670–E4679.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1801889115
Keijzer, F. (2015). Moving and sensing without input and output: early nervous
systems and the origins of the animal sensorimotor organization.Biol. Philos.
30, 311–331. doi: 10.1007/s10539-015-9483-1
Lange, S. C., Winkler, U., Andresen, L., Byhrø, M., Waagepetersen, H. S.,
Hirrlinger, J., et al. (2015). Dynamic changes in cytosolic ATP levels in cultured
glutamatergic neurons during NMDA-induced synaptic activity supported by
glucose or lactate.Neurochem. Res. 40, 2517–2526. doi: 10.1007/s11064-015-
1651-9
le Feber, J., Stegenga, J., and Rutten, W. L. C. (2010). The effect of
slow electrical stimuli to achieve learning in cultured networks of
rat cortical neurons. PLoS One 5:e8871. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0008871
Madhavan, R., Chao, Z. C., and Potter, S. M. (2007). Plasticity of recurring
spatiotemporal activity patterns in cortical networks.Phys. Biol. 4, 181–193.
doi: 10.1088/1478-3975/4/3/005
Magistretti, P. J., and Allaman, I. (2018). Lactate in the brain: from metabolic
end-product to signalling molecule. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 19, 235–249.
doi: 10.1038/nrn.2018.19
Maloof, A. C., Porter, S. M., Moore, J. L., Dudas, F. O., Bowring, S. A.,
Higgins, J. A., et al. (2010). The earliest Cambrian record of animals
and ocean geochemical change. Geol. Soc. Am. Bull. 122, 1731–1774.
doi: 10.1130/B30346.1
Maturana, H. (1978). ‘‘Cognition,’’ inWahrnehmung und Kommunikation, eds
P. M. Hejl, W. K. Köck and G. Roth (Frankfurt: Peter Lang), 29–49.
Maturana, H. R. (1980). ‘‘Biology of cognition,’’ inAutopoiesis and Cognition.
Boston Studies in the Philosophy and History of Science, eds H. Maturana and F.
J. Varela (Dordrecht: Springer), 1–58. doi: 10.1007/978-94-009-8947-4_5
Maturana, H. (2002). Autopoiesis, structural coupling and cognition: a history of
these and other notions in the biology of cognition.Cybern. Hum. Knowing9,
5–34.
Maturana, H. R. (2008). Anticipation and self-consciousness. Are these
functions of the brain?Constructivist Found. 4, 18–20. Available online at:
http://constructivist.info/4/1/018.
Maturana, H. R., and Varela, F. J. (1987).The Tree of Knowledge: The Biological
Roots of Human Understanding. Boulder, CO: New Science Library/Shambhala
Publications.
Mayr, E. (1961). Cause and effect in biology: kinds of causes, predictability
and teleology are viewed by a practicing biologist.Science 134, 1501–1506.
doi: 10.1126/science.134.3489.1501
McGregor, S., and Virgo, N. (2011). Life and its close relatives.Lect. Notes Comput.
Sci. 5778, 230–237. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-21314-4_29
Newman, M. E. J. (1997). A model of mass extinction.J. Theor. Biol.189, 235–252.
doi: 10.1006/jtbi.1997.0508
Novellino, A., D’Angelo, P., Cozzi, L., Chiappalone, M., Sanguineti, V.,
and Martinoia, S. (2007). Connecting neurons to a mobile robot: an
in vitro bidirectional neural interface. Comput. Intell. Neurosci. 2007:12725.
doi: 10.1155/2007/12725
Park, C. O., and Kupper, T. S. (2015). The emerging role of resident memory T
cells in protective immunity and inflammatory disease.Nat. Med.21, 688–697.
doi: 10.1038/nm.3883
Pedersen, S. F., Kapus, A., and Hoffmann, E. K. (2011). Osmosensory mechanisms
in cellular and systemic volume regulation.J. Am. Soc. Nephrol.22, 1587–1597.
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2010121284
Rangaraju, V., Calloway, N., and Ryan, T. A. (2014). Activity-driven local ATP
synthesis is required for synaptic function.Cell 156, 825–835. doi: 10.1016/j.
cell.2013.12.042
Robinson, M. B., and Jackson, J. G. (2016). Astroglial glutamate transporters
coordinate excitatory signaling and brain energetics.Neurochem. Int.98, 56–71.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2016.03.014
Roux, E. (2014). The concept of function in modern physiology.J. Physiol. 592,
2245–2249. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2014.272062
Schulz, K., Sydekum, E., Krueppel, R., Engelbrecht, C. J., Schlegel, F., Schröter, A.,
et al. (2012). Simultaneous BOLD fMRI and fiber-optic calcium recording in
rat neocortex.Nat. Methods9, 597–602. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.2013
Shirakawa, T. (2006). Anticipatory behavior and intracellular communication
in Physarum polycephalum. AIP Conference Proceedings (AIP)839, 541–546.
doi: 10.1063/1.2216665
Sokoloff, L. (2008). The physiological and biochemical bases of functional
brain imaging. Cogn. Neurodyn. 2, 1–5. doi: 10.1007/s11571-007
-9033-x
Southern, J., Pitt-Francis, J., Whiteley, J., Stokeley, D., Kobashi, H., Nobes, R.,
et al. (2008). Multi-scale computational modelling in biology and physiology.
Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 96, 60–89. doi: 10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2007.
07.019
Tessadori, J., Venuta, D., Kumar, S. S., Bisio, M., Pasquale, V., and Chiappalone, M.
(2013). ‘‘Embodied neuronal assemblies: a closed-loop environment for coding
and decoding studies,’’ in2013 6th International IEEE/EMBS Conference on
Neural Engineering (NER), (San Diego, CA, USA), 899–902. doi: 10.1109/NER.
2013.6696080
Toloe, J., Mollajew, R., Kügler, S., and Mironov, S. L. (2014). Metabolic differences
in hippocampal ‘‘Rett’’ neurons revealed by ATP imaging.Mol. Cell. Neurosci.
59, 47–56. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2013.12.008
Trestman, M. (2013). The cambrian explosion and the origins of embodied
cognition. Biol. Theory8, 80–92. doi: 10.1007/s13752-013-0102-6
Ulanowicz, R. E., and Hannon, B. M. (1987). Life and the production of entropy.
Proc. R. Soc. London. Ser. B. Biol. Sci. 232, 181–192. doi: 10.1098/rspb.19
87.0067
Uomini, N., Fairlie, J., Gray, R. D., and Griesser, M. (2020). Extended parenting
and the evolution of cognition.Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci.375:20190495.
doi: 10.1098/rstb.2019.0495
Urien, L., Xiao, Z., Dale, J., Bauer, E. P., Chen, Z., and Wang, J. (2018). Rate
and temporal coding mechanisms in the anterior cingulate cortex for pain
anticipation. Sci. Rep.8:8298. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-26518-x
Vergara, R. C., Jaramillo-Riveri, S., Luarte, A., Moënne-Loccoz, C., Fuentes, R.,
Couve, A., et al. (2019). The energy homeostasis principle: neuronal energy
regulation drives local network dynamics generating behavior.Front. Comput.
Neurosci. 13:49. doi: 10.3389/fncom.2019.00049
Villalobos, M. E. (2015). Biological roots of cognition and the social origins
of mind: autopoietic theory, strict naturalism and cybernetics. University of
Edinburgh, United Kingdom. Available online at: http://hdl.handle.net/1842/
26004.
Villalobos, M., and Ward, D. (2015). Living systems: autonomy, autopoiesis and
enaction. Philos. Technol.28, 225–239. doi: 10.1007/s13347-014-0154-y
Volk, A. A., and Atkinson, J. A. (2013). Infant and child death in the human
environment of evolutionary adaptation. Evol. Hum. Behav. 34, 182–192.
doi: 10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2012.11.007
Weber, B., and Barros, L. F. (2015). The astrocyte: powerhouse
and recycling center. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 7:a020396.
doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a020396
Yufik, Y. (2013). Understanding, consciousness and thermodynamics of cognition.
Chaos Solitons Fractals55, 44–59. doi: 10.1016/j.chaos.2013.04.010
Yufik, Y. (2019). The understanding capacity and information dynamics in the
human brain.Entropy (Basel)21:308. doi: 10.3390/e21030308
Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 13 January 2022 | Volume 15 | Article 782781
Vicencio-Jimenez et al. A Naturalistic Approach to Explain Behavior
Yufik, Y., and Friston, K. (2016). Life and understanding: the origins of
‘‘understanding’’ in self-organizing nervous systems.Front. Syst. Neurosci.
10:98. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2016.00098
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.
Publisher’s Note:All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of
the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in
this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
Copyright © 2022 Vicencio-Jimenez, Villalobos, Maldonado and Vergara.
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction
in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the
copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this
journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with
these terms.
Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 14 January 2022 | Volume 15 | Article 782781