PoS(ICHEP2016)1179
Expected performance of the ATLAS Inner Tracker
upgrade
Simon Viel∗†
on behalf of the ATLAS Collaboration
Lawrence Berkeley National Lab. (US)
E-mail: sviel@cern.ch
The design of the ATLAS Inner Tracker upgrade is underway. This tracking detector, consist-
ing of silicon pixel and strip modules, will replace the current ATLAS Inner Detector to recon-
struct tracks from charged particles produced at the very high collision rate expected from the
High-Luminosity Large Hadron Collider. The latest Inner Tracker designs considered, and recent
expected performance results from simulation are presented.
38th International Conference on High Energy Physics
3-10 August 2016
Chicago, USA
∗Speaker.
†The author acknowledges support from the U.S. Department of Energy and the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada.
c⃝Copyright owned by the author(s) under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0). http://pos.sissa.it/
PoS(ICHEP2016)1179
Expected performance of the ATLAS Inner Tracker upgrade Simon Viel
1. Introduction
In 2024–2026, the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) will be upgraded to become the High-
Luminosity LHC (HL-LHC), foreseen to deliver an average of up to 200 proton-proton collisions
every 25 nanoseconds. With an expected dataset of up to 3000 fb −1 at √s = 14 TeV accumulated
over 10 years of HL-LHC operation, the discovery reach of the ATLAS experiment [1] for physics
beyond the Standard Model will be signiﬁcantly improved beyond what is possible with the LHC
dataset [2]. This is particularly true for new processes with small production cross-sections, for
example due to small couplings to Standard Model particles. In the event of a discovery, measuring
the properties of new particles in this large dataset would give physicists the ability to distinguish
between different theoretical models attempting to explain the new phenomena.
The HL-LHC dataset will also allow particle physicists to deepen our understanding of Stan-
dard Model processes. Differential cross-section measurements such as Higgs boson production
and phenomena like same-sign WW production will be performed, looking for deviations with
respect to theoretical predictions. Precision measurements of Higgs boson couplings will also be-
come possible [3], including rare decays such as H →Zγ, H →µ+µ−, and perhaps even H →c ¯c.
Measurements will be carried out in all major Higgs boson production modes: gluon fusion, vector
boson fusion (VBF), V H, t¯tH , tH and b¯bH. The search for di-Higgs production will take cen-
tre stage, mainly in an attempt to measure the triple-Higgs self-coupling but also in searches for
di-Higgs production mechanisms beyond the Standard Model.
Many upgrades to the ATLAS detector will be necessary in order to operate in the very high-
rate environment of the HL-LHC. These scheduled upgrades include a complete replacement of the
ATLAS Inner Detector (ID), with a new Inner Tracker (ITk). The innermost region of ATLAS will
be instrumented with the latest generation of high-rate, low-mass, radiation-hard silicon detectors.
Excellent tracking acceptance and resolution, collision vertex identiﬁcation, and the rejection of
hadronic jets coming from simultaneous collisions other than the one of interest (pileup) are es-
sential features of the ITk. Given the scale of this project, construction must begin to ramp up in
mid-2018, and the ﬁnal steps of technical design and prototyping are underway.
2. Inner Tracker layout: latest design options
Two main Inner Tracker layout design options, shown in Figure1, are currently under review.
Both designs have the same silicon strip detector, with four stereo barrel layers, in addition to six
stereo endcap disks on each side of the detector providing coverage up to pseudorapidity |η| = 2.7.
The silicon pixel detector also has the same number of layers in the two layouts: ﬁve layers in the
barrel, and four concentric ring assemblies, called ring layers, in each endcap. However, the orien-
tation of the pixel modules in the forward region of the barrel is different. Endcap ring positions
have been optimized in each layer to independently provide a required number of measurements
for all tracks originating from the collision region, i.e. within 15 cm of the detector origin.
One of the detector designs features extended pixel barrel layers, to achieve tracking coverage
up to |η|= 4 using long staves. In the forward region of the detector, tracks cross the sensors at
small incidence angle, resulting in the measurement of long pixel clusters [ 4]. This is expected
to bring improvements in pattern recognition for track reconstruction and pileup jet rejection at
1
PoS(ICHEP2016)1179
Expected performance of the ATLAS Inner Tracker upgrade Simon Viel
Figure 1: The main ITk layout designs under consideration, with extended pixel barrel layers (left)
and inclined pixel barrel layers (right). The differences between the two designs are in the forward
region of the pixel detector (red). The stereo strip detector (blue) is the same in both options. [5]
very high pileup, as well as new algorithms for measuring the luminosity delivered to ATLAS by
counting long clusters, and for particle identiﬁcation using long cluster shapes and dE/dX .
In contrast, the ITk layout with inclined pixel barrel layers makes use of an innovative me-
chanical design allowing to place pixel modules in the forward barrel at an angle with respect to
the beam pipe. Compared with the alternative, this layout measures a higher number of space-
points on each track, with tracks from the luminous region crossing the sensors at approximately
normal incidence. Hermetic tracking coverage up to |η|= 4 is achieved with a smaller silicon area
and fewer pixel chips than with extended barrel layers, although since inclined modules are in gen-
eral smaller, the total number of modules is slightly higher. This corresponds to a small reduction
in material in the most forward region of the detector. The ITk community is actively evaluating
the merits of the two proposed layouts, mainly based on the expected performance of the detector.
A decision between the two options for the ITk pixel detector is expected in early 2017.
3. Selected expected performance results
Increasing the tracking coverage to the forward region of the detector signiﬁcantly improves
the detector capabilities [2] for vertex identiﬁcation, pileup jet rejection, electron and photon iden-
tiﬁcation, muon acceptance, missing transverse momentum ( Emiss
T ) resolution and b-tagging per-
formance. Many of these studies are based on three older Inner Tracker layout designs presented
in [2]: the Reference, Middle and Low scenarios covering up to|η|= 4.0, 3.2 and 2.7 respectively1.
The Reference scenario also includes improvements to the forward calorimeters of ATLAS.
Selected expected performance results are shown in Figure 2. For the benchmark processes
Z →µ+µ−and VBF H →γγ , the vertex identiﬁcation efﬁciency improves by about 10% when
forward tracks are measured, and is robust against disabling 10% of ITk silicon modules. Pileup
jets are rejected using tracking conﬁrmation (TC) algorithms, based on the momentum of tracks
within a jet which are associated with the primary vertex. Measuring tracks at high |η|improves
the range of this technique. Pileup jet rejection also allows to improve the Emiss
T resolution, with
the best improvements being observed for the most energetic collision events.
1Updated tracking performance results based on the latest ITk layout designs are available in [5]
2
PoS(ICHEP2016)1179
Expected performance of the ATLAS Inner Tracker upgrade Simon Viel
t
tµ µ→Zγ γ→VBF Hidentification efficiency
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
Reference
Middle
Low
Reference -10%
Low -10%
ATLAS
  Simulation > = 200
µ<2
 )track
T
( pΣSelect vertex with max 
PU jet
η4
−3 −2 −1 −0 1 2 3 4 Number of pile up jets per event
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
ATLAS  Simulation No Track Conf. Reference
Middle
Low
 = 2%
PU
∈=200, µ > 30 GeV, T,j
p
b-jet efficiency
0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
Light-jet rejection
1
10
210
310 Reference
Middle
Low
|>2.7ηReference |
ATLAS Simulation
=200µ
Run 1
Figure 2: Top left: Vertex identiﬁcation efﬁ-
ciency for t¯t, Z →µ+µ− and VBF H →γγ .
Top right: Number of pileup jets per event with-
out TC, and applying TC algorithms tuned to
give 2% pileup jet acceptance. Bottom left:
Light-ﬂavour jet rejection versus b-jet efﬁ-
ciency for the MV1 tagging algorithm. [2]
Figure 2 also shows the b-tagging performance of the ITk, evaluated using ATLAS Run-1
algorithms. For |η|< 2.7, the ITk performance in the Reference and Middle layouts is close to
the Run-1 operating point, in spite of much higher pileup at the HL-LHC. Improving the tracking
coverage up to |η|= 4 makes forward b-tagging possible. These results will be improved by the
use of new algorithms optimized for high pileup.
4. Conclusion
Two design concepts for the ATLAS ITk upgrade towards the HL-LHC are considered, with
different module orientation choices in the forward pixel barrel. Both options offer hermetic track-
ing coverage up to |η|= 4, motivated by the improved vertex identiﬁcation, pileup jet rejection,
as well as the identiﬁcation, acceptance and resolution capabilities for physics objects. Forward
tracking maximizes the expected performance of the upgraded ATLAS detector at the HL-LHC.
References
[1] ATLAS Collaboration, JINST 3 (2008) S08003
[2] ATLAS Collaboration, CERN-LHCC-2015-020 (2015)
[3] ATLAS Collaboration, ATL-PHYS-PUB-2014-016 (2014)
[4] S. Viel et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A 831 (2016) 254-259
[5] ATLAS Collaboration, ATL-PHYS-PUB-2016-025 (2016)
3