Embracing sensorimotor history:
Time-synchronous and time-unrolled Markov
blankets in the free-energy principle
Nathaniel Virgo1, Fernando Rosas2,3,4, Martin Biehl5
nathanielvirgo@elsi.jp, f.rosas@imperial.ac.uk, martin.biehl@cross-compass.com
1 Earth-Life Science Institute (ELSI), Tokyo Institute of Technology, Japan
2 Centre for Psychedelic Research, Department of Brain Science,
Imperial College London, UK
3 Data Science Institute, Imperial College London, UK
4 Centre for Complexity Science, Imperial College London, UK
5 Cross Labs, Cross Compass, Japan
This paper is a commentary on Bruineberg, J., Dolega, K., Dewhurst, J.,
and Baltieri, M. (2021). The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences.https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351
Abstract
The free-energy principle (FEP) builds on an assumption that sensor-
motor loops exhibit Markov blankets in stationary state. We argue that
there is rarely reason to assume a system’s internal and external states
are conditionally independent given the sensorimotor states, and often
reason to assume otherwise. However, under mild assumptions internal
and external states are conditionally independent given the sensorimotor
history.
Bruineberg and colleagues provide a thorough review of Markov blankets
and their limitations in the context of the free-energy principle (FEP). We
wish to complement this by drawing attention to two additional issues that we
believe have important consequences for the FEP. Firstly, contrary to what one
might expect, the condition known as “Markov blanket” in the FEP literature
is generally not guaranteed by a sensor-motor loop structure. Secondly, the
Markov blanket condition needed for the FEP is far stronger than it appears to
be. These issues severely limit the scope of applicability of current formulations
of the FEP. Fortunately, we believe they can be solved, and give some hints
towards a resolution.
As Bruineberg et al. explain, the notion of a Markov blanket arises in the
context of graphical models, and in particular, Bayesian networks. In a Bayesian
network each node represents a random variable, and their joint distribution
1
Figure 1: top: A “time-unrolled” sensor-motor
loop in discrete time. The time-unrolled graph is a
Bayesian network, and hence the Pearl framework
can be applied. It follows that the current internal
and external states, µ3 and ϕ3 (blue, orange) are
conditionally independent given the nodes in light
green, which consist of the past histories of sen-
sor and actuator states, s1, s2, s3 and a1, a2, a3, as
well as the initial states µ0 and ϕ0. (The dashed
line indicates that the initial states might be corre-
lated.) bottom: The current internal and external
states are in general not conditionally indepen-
dent given only the current sensor and actuator
states, s3 and a3, because µ3 and ϕ3 have com-
mon ancestors that are not screened off by these
nodes, e.g. µ1 and ϕ1 (red). This is true regard-
less of stationarity. If the system is ergodic then
the dependence on the initial states will disappear
in the infinite limit, so that we can effectively say
that µt and ϕt are conditionally independent given
the infinite past history of the sensorimotor states.
factors in a particular way that depends on the topology of the graph (Pearl
1988).
The literature on FEP is also concerned with graphs that are not Bayesian
networks. Each node in these graphs represents a dynamical variable of a system
and an edge represents the possibility that one dynamical variable can influence
another. These include the adjacency matrix described in Bruineberg et al.’s
Section 4.2, and also the sensor-motor loop as illustrated in their Figure 2.
Typically, the edges in such graphs correspond to nonzero terms in a Jacobian
matrix. We will call such graphs influence graphs.
A stationary state defines a joint distribution over the nodes of an influ-
ence graph. There is then some resemblance between the influence graphs and
Bayesian networks, since both contain nodes that represent random variables
and edges that represent influences of some kind. However, these two types of
graph are fundamentally different. Influence graphs are not necessarily acyclic,
but more importantly, the theorems in Pearl’s formalism do not apply to influ-
ence graphs. In particular, one might expect that the sensor-motor loop (Bru-
ineberg et al.’s Figure 2) would imply the time-synchronous Markov blanket
condition
µt ⊥ ⊥ϕt | st, at. (1)
However, this is not the case in general — and this is important because (1)
is used in deriving the FEP. This issue was recently pointed out (Biehl et al.,
2021; Aguilera et al. 2021), and while it has been acknowledged in some of the
most recent FEP literature it is not as widely known as it should be. We sketch
the underlying reason for it in Figure 1.
2
Recent works (e.g. Friston et al., 2021a; Friston et al., 2021b) have sought
to address this by seeking additional conditions or conjectures under which the
needed relationship holds. However, the fact that these conditions are highly
non-trivial suggest that the scope of the FEP may be much more limited than
previously thought.
Furthermore, (1) itself puts a very strong constraint on a system’s dynamics.
One way to see this is via the data processing inequality (Cover and Thomas,
2006, p. 34), which imposes that if (1) holds then all information that µt and
ϕt share needs to be present in ( st, at). This would mean that the internal and
external states could share no more information than is contained in the sensor
and motor states at the current time .
But cases where information is stored in the environment and the agent but
not in the blanket are ubiquitous. Imagine a friend gives you a phone number
written on a piece of paper, which you memorise and then store in a box. The
statistical independence between internal and external variables conditioned on
active and sensory ones is broken as soon as the piece of paper is away from
your sensory input. Once it’s out of sight the phone number cannot be stored
simultaneously in your internal state and on the piece of paper. As Parr et al.
(2021) discuss, this need not be true in transients even if it holds in stationary
state. Nevertheless it puts an unrealistic constraint on the stationary dynamics,
which we don’t expect to be applicable to living organisms.
A possible resolution of this limitation follows from Figure 1. Although (1)
cannot be assumed for a general sensor-motor loop, we do have the relationship
µt ⊥ ⊥ϕt | st, at, st−1, at−1, st−2, at−2, . . . . (2)
We expect an analogous result in continuous time. The internal and external
states are not conditionally independent given the current sensorimotor states,
but, under only mild assumptions, they are conditionally independent given
the sensorimotor history. Alternative constructions of blankets that follow these
principles are currently being investigated (e.g. Rosas et al. 2020).
This makes intuitive sense: your knowledge of the world is not limited by
what you can sense at the current moment, but it is limited by what you have
been able to sense over your whole lifetime. If a new version of the FEP can be
constructed based on this alternative conditional independence relation, then it
will be more encompassing and will have something close to the broad applica-
bility that was originally intended.
Funding statement
M.B. and N.V. acknowledge the support of Grant 62229 from the John Tem-
pleton Foundation. The opinions expressed in this publication are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the John Templeton Foun-
dation. F.R. is supported by the Ad Astra Chandaria Foundation.
3
Conflicts of interest statement
None.
References
Aguilera, M., Millidge, B., Tschantz, A., and Buckley, C. L. (2021). How par-
ticular is the physics of the free energy principle? Physics of Life Reviews .
Biehl, M., Pollock, F. A., & Kanai, R. (2021). A technical critique of some parts
of the Free Energy Principle. Entropy, 23(3), 293.
Cover, T. M. & Thomas, J. A. (2006). Elements of information theory (second
edition). John Wiley & Sons.
Friston, K. J., Da Costa, L., & Parr, T. (2021a). Some interesting observations
on the free energy principle. Entropy, 23(8), 1076.
Friston, K., Heins, C., Ueltzh¨ offer, K., Da Costa, L., & Parr, T. (2021b). Stochas-
tic Chaos and Markov Blankets. Entropy, 23(9), 1220.
Parr, T., Da Costa, L., Heins, C., Ramstead, M. J. D., & Friston, K. J. (2021).
Memory and Markov Blankets. Entropy, 23(9), 1105.
Pearl, J. (1988). Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: networks of plau-
sible inference. Morgan Kaufmann.
Rosas, F. E., Mediano, P. A., Biehl, M., Chandaria, S., & Polani, D. (2020,
September). Causal blankets: Theory and algorithmic framework. In Interna-
tional Workshop on Active Inference (pp. 187-198). Springer, Cham.
4