Cross-Cultural Effects and Attention in Active 
Inference 
 
Yao Wen* 
Linguistics, Division of Psychology and Language Sciences, University College London, London, UK 
*Correspondence: yao.wen@ucl.ac.uk 
 
 
 
Abstract—Earlier behavioural studies have shown a social 
and cognitive difference between European Americans and 
East Asian  people. Western ers are thought to be more 
focused on object information, while the East Asians are 
more sensitive to context or relationship informat ion. We 
focused on two neural studies and argued that this cross -
cultural difference phenomenon could be explained by the  
attention mechanism. We applied the active inference 
framework to distinguish two aspects of attention, namely, 
the gain control and e pistemic value. The former is involved 
in the exogenous, low -level response, and this automatic 
attention could account for the findings that are culturally 
favoured, such as change blindness and field dependence -
independence distinction. The latter is inv olved in the 
endogenous, high -level responses, which is identical to the  
Bayesian surprise and could be measured by the P3 
component. This epistemic value may account for tasks 
where no behavioural differences were found. Both the 
exogenous and endogenous value is used to minimise free 
energy in order to maximise the evidence of the generative 
model.   
 
Keywords—cross-culture effect, attention, planning, 
prediction, Markov decision process 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Social cognition studies found that there is a distinction 
between Eastern and Western reasoning mode. That is, a 
holistic tendency of the former and an analytic style of the 
latter [1 ]-[7]. This cognitive difference is deemed as the 
main attribute to the beliefs about the nature of the world 
and is hypothesised as a cause of allocating attention 
resources in particular ways. This means  that people from 
different cultur al groups may see the world in different 
ways, which means that our perception is contextually (or 
culturally) dependent. Behaviour research have listed a 
series of qualitative distinctions in metacognition, such as 
the field dependence -field independence distinctio n [ 8], 
which means the degree to which the perception of an 
object is influenced by the context it is embedded in., or, 
more simply the ability of disassociating the foreground 
objects with the background; The hindsight -bias problem 
which states that people react to prediction errors less 
surprisingly. However, in co mparison to the Westerners, 
Eastern people are remarkably less surprised by the 
unusual results of the events than they should be and 
 
Manuscript received June 17 , 20 22; revised September 1, 20 22; 
accepted September 18, 2022. 
believed they had predicted the turning at the first place [5]. 
Besides, research also report t he Change -Blindness 
phenomenon, an attentional effect that influences the 
perception process for people of different cultures. People 
failed to recognise marked changes around even when they 
are asked to find out the changes in the visual filed [9]. 
Overall, East Asian cultures emph asise the practices of 
interdependence, resulting in the consequences that they 
are less likely to distinguish the objects from the 
background, more sensitive to contextual information 
changes [10], and more possibly to overestimate the 
probability they wo uld have predicted the results if they 
were told the outcome and more field -dependent in the 
Road-and Frame test [ 4]. Whereas European Americans 
emphasise practices of independence, so that they always 
show big surprise when the prediction is violated [11]; they 
constantly fixate more on focal objects and they detect 
object changes more easily than changes in background. 
However, in much strictly designed neuronal 
experiments [1 2]-[14], no such behavioural differences 
were found when participants were instr ucted to do 
culturally non -preferred tasks, albeit slower and less 
accurate meanwhile. Researchers from the neuroscience 
camp argue that culture does influence brain function 
powerfully by biasing towards certain neuronal pathways 
and a violation of this b ias may lead to an increased brain 
activity in areas that are associated with attention. This 
raises the issue of how attention entrains the  decision-
making process and leads to the overall equally efficient 
global behaviour. Given cultural practices do fa cilitate 
certain decision-making process (i.e., faster reaction time 
in culturally preferred condition in comparison to 
culturally non-preferred condition), which mainly unfolds 
in basal ganglia circuits  by computing the difference 
between the values of th e direct and indirect neuronal 
pathways [15], [16], there may be a unified theorem that 
mediates the habitual preference and attention. T o our 
knowledge, active inference is the best candidate referring 
to, since basically, it balances the priors and uncer tainty 
and offers a frame of inferencing optimal future actions 
which is crucial  to the decision-making process. This 
decision process may lie at the core of the cross -cultural 
effect. Although the whole theorem may look complex, we 
can simply take its essence, that is, it emphasises the 
importance of generative model and prior beliefs agents 
International Journal of Pharma Medicine and Biological Sciences Vol. 12, No. 1, January 2023
1
doi: 10.18178/ijpmbs.12.1.1-12
hold such that the world is selectively sampled to fit with 
the hypothesis in which priors play a role in generating 
prediction errors [1 7]. Priors always pair with  habitual 
motor actions, while generative model encodes entropy , 
which leads to the reduction of uncertainty (i.e., 
exploration). When planning, the latter offers explanations 
to the data we perceive, while the former are the beliefs 
that contextualises our sampling of the world by assigning 
different weightings to the sequences of actions at the 
counterfactual level (for example, whether to turn on the 
light before going home, if the lighting system in your 
house is controlled by intelligent devices or tur n on the 
light after are different action sequences. What active 
inference encodes is the beliefs about these sequences, not 
actions). In the context of cross -cultural effect, we can 
unpack this phenomenon as people who are equipped with 
different priors s elect different policies (i.e., several 
possible behavioural trajectories) to minimise prediction 
errors. An example for this is Hedden et al .’s work, in 
which the authors found a dissociation between the 
habitual behaviour (when doing culturally favoured t ask) 
and uncertainty resolving process ( when doing culturally 
unfavored task ), but overall equal accuracy and timing. 
The crucial funding is the equal time the two groups used 
to make judgements. This means, no matter how biased 
people are, when they are r equired to do an unbiased 
decision-making task, the energy that is used is equal. 
From the active inference  perspective, the minimum 
expected free energy legitimates the goodness of a policy 
which balances the exploitation and exploration well. 
Once these balances are achieved, a motor action will be 
elicited.  
Besides, the planning of actions has a particular relation 
with attention, in the sense of ‘salience’ which could be 
deemed as a property of locations that the highly likely 
next saccade would target . The evaluation of salience is a 
process of computing the possibility of different policies 
in the exploration process. For example, each of the four 
quadrants of the squared pictures has different information 
gain that helps to resolve uncertainty  [18]. The most 
salience position is the place that offers the maximal 
information which could increase the confidence of agents’ 
beliefs about the world [17]. The basal ganglia are thought 
as a perfect candidate to compute the salience since the 
dopamine signal is now considered as encoding the 
imprecision of prior beliefs about policies [19]. It is argued 
that the prior belief is computed by the direct pathway 
between the striatum and Globus pallidus internus, while 
the information gain is evaluated by the indir ect, slowly 
evolving pathways. This seemingly redundant pathways 
may plausible since they meet the requirement of timing of 
messages in each pathway [ 20]. This suits well with the 
findings of equal time both groups used.  The direct 
pathway has a short lat ency and could disinhibit a set of 
policies quickly, while the indirect pathway receives 
signals from wide range of higher -level cortical areas so 
that it takes long time to play out its signals. The latter may 
also account for the relatively long reaction  time when 
participants are required to make the judgement under the 
culturally non-favoured condition since our brain need to 
integrate the information into the decision-making process. 
This evidence accumulation could be reflected by 
increased activity i n dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, and 
signals from this brain area reveals the weighting of 
posterior beliefs over prior expectations [21]. 
Armed with these works, the current paper aims to 
explain the attention mechanism in respect of active 
inference theorem and then unify all the results with one 
possible computational model. This paper comprises three 
sections. In the first, we will focus on two studies that 
reflect the neural correlates that underlie this cognition 
problem. In the second, we will intro duce the essence of 
active inference and a recently developed model, namely 
the Markov decision process. Thirdly, we will reiterate the 
Lewis et al. and Hedden et al. experiments in the spirit of 
this model. We propose that human make decisions 
according to prediction errors that are transported between 
levels of the hierarchical generative model. Attention 
governs precision of prediction errors so that only those 
precise prediction errors that are weighted by the second -
order attention mechanism can be gained to help revise the 
higher beliefs. Attention could be shaped by culture, 
resulting in that people with different groups are sensitive 
to different types of stimuli. However, attention can also 
be shifted towards the most salient position to resolve 
uncertainty about hidden cause created by context [2 2]. 
The process of human’s actively sampling the world and 
keep themselves within limited states can be explained by 
the active inference theorem. Behaviour experiments can 
capture the cultural effect either b y manipulating the 
context which participants usually immerse themselves in, 
or by showing them cultural preferred and cultural non -
preferred stimuli. But overall, these cultur al effects are a 
violation of their causal models that shaped by social 
demands.  
II. ENDOGENOUS COMPONENTS OF CROSS-CULTURE 
EFFECT 
Lewis and his colleague s looked into the neural 
correlates that reflect this cognitive difference using a 
three stimuli P3a event -related potential design [1 3]. In 
this type of oddball experiments, the target  (oddball) will 
elicit a reliable positive event -related potential peak 
around 300-400ms after the onset of the target (oddball) 
stimuli since the ERP technique offers time -lock neural 
activity recordings. The well -documented P300 signal is 
thought to be p ositively correlated with stimulus 
probability, task demand and attention allocation in 
processing this less likely appear yet meaningful oddball 
[23]. In this paper, Lewis et al examined two types of P300 
components. The P3a is sensitive to deviations from the 
temporal stimulus covariance created by the combination 
of standard and target stimuli, whereas the P3b is a late 
positive distribution and is thought to signal a context -
updating operation [24]. The idea is if East Asians indeed 
are more sensitive to context and perceptual field, then 
there would be a significant P3a difference between two 
groups. On the other hand, if European Americans attend 
more to focal object, then they should display a relatively 
larger P3b amplitude. The data proved this hypothesis and 
International Journal of Pharma Medicine and Biological Sciences Vol. 12, No. 1, January 2023
2
their further mediation analysis showed that the 
relationship between culture and P3a is mediated by 
interdependent self-construal. 
Hedden used functional magnetic resonance imaging 
technique to locate the place in the brain where these 
cultural experiences influence judgements [12]. The study 
was based on the found that the harder the task is, the more 
attentional effort will be put [2 5]. Participants from two 
different cultures are put into fMRI scanner and are asked 
to make judgements regarding the line lengths. They 
observed a series of stimuli containing a vertical line inside 
a box . The task is to judge the stimuli with or without 
considering the box . Specifically, in the relative 
instruction part of the task , participants are required to 
judge whether the proportional scaling of the combination 
of the box and the line is same with the previous 
combination. In absolute instruction parts participants 
judge whether the length of the current line matches the 
previous one regardless of the box size. In each trial of the 
block, either the two instructions lead to the same 
conclusion —policy congruent condition, or the two 
instructions lead to the opposite conclusion  — the 
incongruent condition. The relative judgement is East 
Asian-culture-preferred since they care more about the 
context, environment, and relationships, while the absolute 
condition is the Western European culture -favored due to 
their habits of focusing more on individuals. Participants 
also finished an independent questionnaire which reflects 
traits of self -identify. The authors found in the congruent 
trials, participants are faster and more accurate, and no 
differences are found  in culture incongruent trails (i.e., 
both groups perform similarly). Whereas in the 
incongruent condition, brain imaging showed that both 
group members recruited extra cognitive effort when 
processing cultural non-preferred tasks and the brain areas 
that are correlated with attention control and working 
memory are more involved. The culture-identity 
questionnaire with higher scores for culture -preferred 
traits correlate significantly with less activation of ROIs in 
culture-preferred trails. 
III. ACTIVE INFERENCE AND MARKOV DECISION 
PROCESS 
The Hedden et al study pointed out attention plays a 
crucial role in shaping cognitive differences, whereas 
Lewis et al argued people with different cultural identity 
tend to perceive different types of information, the 
violation of expectations to this type of information 
induces P300 component — an indicator of surprisal. The 
latency of the P300 component indicates the level of 
accuracy the participant evaluated the stimuli [2 4], and 
cultural background exerts its influence o n the neural 
processing of context through the mediator of self -
construal [1 3]. These findings imply a prediction model 
people use to represent the world and some segments of 
the model are assigned heightened availability.  However, 
these descriptions of a ttention on the nature of P300 
component are not precise.  We are expecting a model to 
code attention, besides, we also need to illustrate how the 
prediction error produced by this predictive model attracts 
attention. The answer to this question points to Active 
Inference theorem since it offers a mathematical approach 
to explain the importance of how the uncertainty is 
resolved and how the resolution of uncertainty results in 
attention. Briefly speaking, Bayesian surprise attracts 
attention, and this information is the epistemic value of an 
expected free energy formulation in the active inference 
theorem. What we are going to explain below is a highly 
simplified version based on Friston’s works [26], [27]. 
Adaptive agents like humans act to limit the repert oire 
of physiological and perceptual states in which they can 
find themselves [2 8]. The limited repertoire signals some 
attractors that lead living creatures towards their expected 
states. Homoeostasis is a perfect example. When core body 
temperature devia tes from the typical temperature range, 
agents would reason the possible causes and then act 
accordingly to keep body temperature within homeostatic 
ranges. The ability to fit subjectively implies  that the 
agent’s internal states hold Bayesian beliefs that  encode 
and predict the external causes of sensory information, so 
that the internal active states reasoning in a way as if the 
agent ascent on the marginal recognition density over the 
external states. In other words, to survive, agents need to 
be able to minimise the divergence between the hypothesis 
that is currently selected  and the true posterior beliefs 
under the generative model which is fine -tuned over 
ontogeny [2 9]. This discrepancy plus surpris al is 
variational free energy. Briefly speaking, variational free 
energy is predictive error in nature. Adaptiveness solicits 
familiar, unsurprising sensations from the environment,  
this means agents realise themselves by minimising 
surprise, namely the negative logarithm of Bayesian model 
evidence −lnP(Õ|m), where O denotes observations and 
m denotes ‘generative model’. Variational free energy is 
an upper bound of log model -evidence. Since model 
evidence is nearly impossible to compute, naturally, 
variational free energy measures the approximation of how 
much evidence provided by the data in terms of the 
generative model (i.e., the ‘m’) of the causal process. The 
states define the observations, because states mirror the 
causal relationship between the real world and its 
corresponding mental representations in the brain, and 
inference (or planning) is an inversion of generative model. 
Reasoning back from observation to causal states leads to 
the asymmetry between causation and observation, so that 
when making decisions (action), to avoid surprise, agents 
weigh different policies and chose the most possible states 
(one possible causal state) that maximise expectations with 
respect to free energy, and actively sample (sensation) 
observations associated with the minimised free energy. In 
brief, reducing prediction error (variational free energy) 
drives perception [ 30], action [ 31], attention [3 2] and 
motivational value processing [33] mainly because it 
equips the brain with the function of inferring the causality. 
In this way, living creatures adapt the fast -changing 
environment. 
The problem is organisms have only sensation data. 
Active inference thus suggests planning as inference under 
the energy principle [17], [34], [35]. To find the most 
approximate posterior belief, generative models like 
International Journal of Pharma Medicine and Biological Sciences Vol. 12, No. 1, January 2023
3
predictive coding or Bayesian decision theory with 
Markov decision processes are good candidates to equip 
agents. Active inference takes the latter to account for the 
creature’s belief updating and behaviour as the inversion 
of a generative model. In this way, the action -sensation 
loop is linked by expectations , that is, the  expectations 
depend on observations a nd actions depend upon 
expectations. This loop shows how agents’   internal 
predictive models communicate with the real  world. In 
other words, agents interact with the world and make 
decisions of actions as a function of their newly updated 
expectations. The expectations are updated according to 
the sensory data agents sampled and are used to refine their 
beliefs about the  states of the generative process, namely 
the world. We can understand active inference as gathering 
sensory evidence for an agent’s model of its world, and by 
doing so, the agent realises the so -called self-evidencing. 
This is a rather subtle statement li es at the heart of active 
inference that agents adjust their expectations to minimise 
free energy and they can only realise these requirements 
when they believe the observations they actively sampled 
can lead to the minimisation of free energy. For example , 
I believe I need to keep my body temperature in cold 
winter, so I would either actively wrap up, or stay indoors 
because I believe these policies will make sure I will not 
get cold. This is where the expected free energy plays a 
role. The expected free e nergy is the difference between 
the energy of the counterfactual outcomes and states that 
generates these outcomes expected under the posterior 
distribution Q (𝑂𝜏,𝑆𝜏|𝜋) and the entropy of the posterior 
predictive distribution over hidden states [3 6]. 𝑄 (𝑆,̃ 𝜋)is 
a counterfactual posterior distribution over hidden states 
𝑆𝜏 under current beliefs, while current beliefs (the priors) 
about hidden states depend on past observations. The prior 
beliefs will be the pragmatic (or, extrinsic) value which 
guide agents towards the goal no matter what policy they 
choose. When planning or reasoning, to minimise the 
expected free energy in the future, agents need to choose 
the policy that could offer more information about ‘what 
the observation I would get’ and ‘at what stat e I would be 
in’. Put simply, agents are in search of a policy that would 
lead to the maximal mutual information, Bayesian surprise, 
or information gain. We can also understand this as agents 
are purposefully navigating themselves to the outcomes 
that can maximally update their current beliefs towards the 
expected states. The expected free energy over the ideal 
policy will then be written as the summation of the 
pragmatic value offered by prior belief, the epistemic value 
which tells the reduction of uncert ainty of future states 
offered by possible outcomes and information gain for 
parameters (i.e., novelty). It is a policy where the power of 
epistemic value is contextualised by the pragmatic value. 
This is key to understand the cross -cultural difference 
since the execution of the culture favoured decision is 
influenced by the resolution of uncertainty reduction, and 
the extent to which the agent would explore the 
environment  depends on a precision parameter  𝛾.  
The cultural effect is  related to attention (i.e., expected 
precision parameter), a variance that reflects how 
confident (precise) a model’s prediction is. It is the second-
order, non -linear inference process which modulates the 
first-order linear driving connections [37]. Before moving 
to discuss how this parameter works, it is necessary to 
formulate the graphic model (MDP) in Fig. 1. to illustrate 
their relationships. In this model, variables are defined as 
Table I. 
 
Figure 1.  Parameters that are involved in policy optimization. 
 
International Journal of Pharma Medicine and Biological Sciences Vol. 12, No. 1, January 2023
4
TABLE I.  GLOSSARY OF EXPRESSIONS FOR THE GENERATIVE MODEL 
Oτ Outcomes or observations at time τ 
Sτ Hidden states at time τ. Often serves as context or choices. For example, in Ponsner paradigm, there are two contexts, 
namely ‘looking at right and looking at left’. In figure-background experiments, background is also a ‘context’. 
Q An approximate posterior over hidden and control states 
π A vector encoding the distribution over action policies reflecting the predicted value of each policy. Each policy I a 
series of allowable actions in a vector U, where actions correspond to different state transitions that can be chosen for 
each state factor. 
A matrix 
P (Oτ | Sτ) 
A matrix encoding likelihood of the relationship between hidden states and outcomes. It solves questions like which 
outcomes are most likely when there are multiple hidden states. 
B matrix 
P (Sτ+1 | Sτ, π） 
A matrix encoding beliefs about how hidden states will evolve over time 
C matrix A matrix encoding the degree to which the observed outcomes are preferred over others. Technically, it is modelled as 
prior expectations over outcomes. For example, when walking in foggy forest, observations from auditory channel 
may be improved or outweighed than visual observations. 
D vector A vector encoding beliefs about initial hidden states. 
E vector 
P (π) 
A prior probability distribution over policies, implemented as a vector assigning one value to each policy. Always 
regarded as habit. 
The squares on this map are parameters that map the 
most possible hidden states to the observed outcomes. 
Basically, this picture is a road map that can be used to 
infer the quantities of the hidden states and the relationship 
between hidden states and outcomes by adjusting different 
‘square parameter’. The ‘D -S1-A-O1’ pathway shows the 
basic perception at a single point time, and when policy π 
is added in, the model generates a temporal time depth. 
Different cognitive activities can be measured in this time-
windows, and we mainly are interested in the attention 
effect from 100 ms up to 300 ms after the onset of stimuli. 
The ‘D -S1-A-O1’ pathways  means the hidden state 
(posterior expectations) S 1 can be inferred from sensory 
evidence O1 based on the prior beliefs D and a likelihood 
matrix A. The S1 can be thought as the best explanation of 
the observations. The transition from S1 to S2 relies on the 
B matrix layer. It describes beliefs about how state evolves 
over time, independent of the true future observations. 
Crucially, B matrix and states of previous time point (i.e., 
τ-1) function as a temporal empirical prior. A series of B 
matrix form diff erent policies π, each of which holds 
different predictions for the future. This is the core of 
active inference, namely, the policy selection (i.e., 
planning). Note that, the posterior belief about a policy 
depends only on the current internal state, that  is, internal 
states can only infer action through its sensory sequelae. 
This creates a distinction between action and beliefs about 
its consequences encoded by internal states [3 6]. Due to 
this difficulty of licensing correct action but only beliefs 
about action consequences encoded by internal states, 
active inference reverses the usual logic of action selection 
into asking “given the assumption that I achieve my 
preferred outcomes, what course of action am I most likely 
to pursue ”. This means agents need  to hold mental 
representations of outcomes under different policy series , 
and the dynamics of hidden states over time endow agents 
with working memory which enables evidence 
accumulation. The evolution of minimisation of prediction 
error may lead to the e mergence of the best predictors in 
the higher level. This finessed regularity resists to change 
since it is good enough to predict the outcomes in a longer 
time scale. A good example is processing a sentence. The 
lower level infers single word, and higher level infers 
categories and the combination of categories of words, 
while the highest level infers the sequence of the 
combination of different categories. We can also take 
clock as an analogy; a ticking of the minute hand 
corresponds to the lower level. A t the end of each circle, 
the hour hand, which corresponds to the higher level, ticks 
once [38]. In active inference, this is where the pragmatic 
value is computed [ 39], [40]. The γ is an indicator of the 
sensitivity about how precise the prior beliefs abo ut 
policies are. The advance of adopting the MDP model is 
its hierarchical nature enables us to see how the higher -
level parameters influence the deep temporal structures. 
The MDP model can be expended in a nested fashion such 
that the beliefs about the po licy and the first hidden state 
only depends on the hidden state one level above. That is, 
the policy, together with its mother and child hidden state 
node, form a statistical shield that contains all the 
information that is required to generate certain 
observations. What we show in the graph is a basic one -
level unit of MDP model. We can take it as a whole, and 
add another state layer upper the π node, such that the 
chosen of  this policy depends on whether its mother 
node is activated. Further, we can ima gine that there are 
several mother nodes in parallel, each of which generate 
different outcomes. The active inference suggests that 
agents can actively sampling the world by activating 
different state nodes. This possibly is how γ parameter 
mediates the higher states with the lower levels where the 
explorative process unfolds. Also, this is where culture 
exerts its influence on different ways of navigating the 
world. 
International Journal of Pharma Medicine and Biological Sciences Vol. 12, No. 1, January 2023
5
IV. ATTENTION MECHANISM 
Attention is established by measuring the precision of 
probabilistic re presentations in hierarchical inference 
about the cause of sensations. Prediction errors that diverse 
in precision level compete to be explained away, leading 
to this precision -weighting mechanism [ 41]. Superficial 
pyramidal cells are proposed to be crucia l in reporting 
precision-weighted prediction error which has more 
influence at higher levels [ 42]. Attention hence is thought 
to modulate excitability of neuronal populations that 
generate prediction error and attenuates less reliable 
prediction error. For example, acetylcholine is supposed to 
exert its influence on low -level bottom -up auditory 
processing through boosting postsynaptic gain when 
stimuli are predictable, resulting in accelerating brain’s 
response to the  reliable prediction error  [43]. The mirror 
neuron system is proposed engage s in inferring causes of 
action by observing and minimising the prediction error at 
all cortical hierarchical levels that are involved in motion -
observation. But the precision of this kind of prediction 
error should be w eakened when agents elicit their own 
actions [ 44]. A failure of attenuation leads to illusions, 
which means, physically, agents failed to infer whether the 
actions are done by themselves or others [ 19]. Reporting 
precise prediction error is vital in making optimal 
inference and balancing internal modal with sensory data 
at hand [4 5], [46]. Attention’s nature of ascending 
prediction error and influencing higher level hidden states 
can be thought as state-dependent. Agents learn state -
dependent patterns  of noise , and when sampling, this 
learned patterns are served as prior beliefs to guide 
perception and action. A change in states of the 
environment will lead to a change of information-to-noise 
ratio and change the location where attention will be set. 
This does not mean attention is always a conscious process 
[39]. Indeed, sensory data are highly biased both by 
bottom-up and top-down predictions, and attention can be 
unaware. A well -studied top -down spatial attention bias , 
which is also inspiring in understanding automatic culture 
attentional effect i s the Ponsner paradigm. Under this 
experimental setting, participants are asked to maintain 
fixation on a central fixation  and respond as quickly as 
possible to the appearance of a peripheral target. The target 
is cued either by a central arrow which indicates the 
direction of the upcoming target  80% of time  accurately, 
or a square that shows up around the location the target 
will show . The valid cue speeded the detection time 
significantly and researchers argued this is due to 
endogenous attention facilities the prior knowledge, or the 
hidden state that generates the observations that are 
currently processed. Feldman and Friston modelled this 
task with a 2 -level hierarchical model [3 2]. They 
demonstrated that the peripheral box, serving as 
exogenous (overt) cue, attracts attention by augmenting 
local precision (the right place), so that the spot where the 
peripheral cue existed gains a boosted precision, which 
excites the corresponding hidden state. The appeara nce of 
the arrow cue solicits a high -precision prediction error, 
which excites the hidden cause of the higher level that 
drives the hidden states towards biased location. This bias 
effect lasts for a while, waiting for a forthcoming target. If 
the target i s the expected one, then a high -precision 
prediction error will be generated, and stabilises the hidden 
cause at the second level, which will activate its 
corresponding hidden state at the first level, results in a 
perception of a target. If the target is not what is expected, 
the bias effect will disappear, thus non -activate hidden 
state fails to generate an invalid target. Note, the hidden 
state, biased by the hidden cause serves as a temporal prior, 
and the target is the expected surprise. In short, a ttention 
mechanism offers unambiguous perception information 
that should be boosted when encountered and should be 
sought when absent. It enhances reliable prediction errors 
as well as attenuate s irrelevant prediction error s. The 
attenuating function is related to figure-ground recognition 
process [3 7], which we can use to explain t he figure-
ground segregation in cross-culture difference. 
The process discussed above is overt attention, meaning 
the result of attention has been successfully executed, for 
example, an eye movement. Apart from this automatic 
overt attention, there is another aspect of attention, namely, 
the covert attention which is proposed by Posner et al that 
attention can be reoriented to the non -attended but 
stimulated space without firstly det ecting the signal. This  
attention is argued as a bottom-up bias [47]. Abrupt-onset 
stimuli, which pops out from the background as outliers, 
and thus attracts human attention naturally, even task 
irrelevant [4 8], [49]. This type of stimuli offers 
information in Shannon information fashion because 
Shannon entropy requires integration of information 
offered by new outcomes over the space of  ‘new 
outcome’  of all possible outcomes. Even sometimes, 
stimuli capture an approximation of surprise, it is flawed 
sometimes, hence not the best candidate accounts for 
attention. He also suggested that the programming period 
of attention is separated from the detection period 
anatomically. The latter is embedded in the oculomotor 
networks and responds habitually to the  certain type of 
signal. Once the stimuli deviate from the habitual type, 
extra effort is needed to detect the stimuli. Some studies 
imply the overlap of neural networks between attention 
and oculomotor control can be modulated by dopamine 
[40], [50], [51], since the disruption of the dopaminergic 
projection to striatum disrupts normal eye movements [52]. 
More precisely, the behaviour of phasic dopamine signals 
reflects the confidence in posterior beliefs about policies 
[53], [54], and this is the γ parameter introduced in the 
active inference, which is used to plan the next move. Both 
overt and covert attention offers information gain agents 
are searching for. Different from information the bottom -
up bias offers, Bayesian surprise requires integration over 
the model space of the observer and attracts attention in a 
top-down fashion. Stimuli of this type do not contain 
information gain themselves but are able to direct attention 
to the spot that contains information gain [5 5]. In the 
language of active infere nce, this Bayesian surprise is the 
‘epistemic value’and the level of its salience depends on 
agents’ beliefs about to what extend the sampled data 
would update the prior belief thus navigate agents towards 
the true posterior beliefs.  
International Journal of Pharma Medicine and Biological Sciences Vol. 12, No. 1, January 2023
6
A common way to test attention level is recording 
saccadic eye -movements. Friston et al . proposed that 
saccadic eye -movements are agents’ experiments [5 6], 
which are used to change outcomes in hopes of gathering 
information that explain the perceptual hypotheses best. 
Statistically, attention can be deemed as an analogy to the 
‘DO’ operator proposed by Pearl [5 7]. This operator 
activates certain parts of information networks and blocks 
others, resulting in a formation of causal Bayesian chain 
[58], and the best explanation of the hidden states. That is, 
the ‘salience’ value guides the sampling towards the 
unambiguous goal that have not been predicted yet but 
with a high degree of certainty. Agents’ motivation is 
solving the uncertainty. As can be seen from the graph 
above that t he policy is a functional of variational free 
energy and precision-weighted expected free energy. It can 
be written as:  
 𝜋 = 𝜎(𝑙𝑛 𝐸 − 𝐹 − 𝛾 ∙ 𝐺) (1) 
With a closer look, this equation means agents need to 
integrate information of both A matrix and B matrix, and 
the generative model is dynamic and hierarchical. That is, 
under each possible policy there are many B matrices that 
denote transitions of hidden states, and different likelihood 
encodes in A matrices. Different combination will 
generate different outcomes, s o that the precision is 
paramount in selecting which pathway agents will select, 
and which will be inhibited. It is worthy of giving an 
intuitive example of how the precision of a one -
dimensional A matrix and B matrix would influence 
inference. Normally we  rely on binding sensory 
information of different modalities —vision, hearing, 
smelling, touching and tasting to make decisions. However, 
when in foggy forest, a good hunter may need to sharpen 
his sensitivity to hearing and smelling signals and rely less 
on other sensory information. In this situation, the 
precision of olfactory and audile prediction errors are 
boosted, resulting in a quick response to signals coming 
from these two sensory channels. If now an olfactory 
signal reports the possibility of a tiger (the likelihood of A 
matrix is high) which rarely inhabit this forest (the belief 
about the precision of A matrix is low), besides, the density 
of the smell directs the possible location the attention 
should be directed to (density is a variable of B matrix the 
change of which represents volatility, a greater volatility 
shows a less precision of B matrix, in contrast, a lower 
volatility means the precision of B matrix is high). The 
more volatile the B matrix changes, the faster the 
representations of the feature s (e.g., density) are forgotten, 
the less easy the inference can be made. The combination 
of A matrix and B matrix can generate a belief about the 
state — ‘how far a tiger is from me’. Once a belief is made, 
a policy is chosen, this temporal work ing memory can 
serve as a context restrains and combine with incoming 
information which is highly related with the refined past 
stimuli to predict future information (i.e., whether there is 
a tiger around or not). In saccadic eye -movements 
experiment, such  as Mirza et al . [59], the 𝛾  value 
measures the overall confidence level of a policy. As for 
the subsets of gamma parameter, they can hold different 
precisions. For example, the precision of A matrix ζ and B 
matrix 𝜔 (for a visual structure of the distribution of 𝛾 
which modulates π, and ζ which modulates matrix A) [60]. 
In a simulation of reading task, Parr and Friston simulated 
the effects of dopamine modulation on salience using a 
hierarchical reading task in which a high precision of 𝛾 
correctly predicted the upcoming word with th e minimum 
eye-movements, whereas the lowest precision of 𝛾 led to 
a random saccade which means a failure in prediction 
upcoming information [40].  
As has been implied above, the saccadic experiments 
are in search of data that bring about an update of belief to 
the maximal level, however, they have great uncertainty 
about the data but only high confidence (precision of 
expected free energy) in the cause of how the data are 
generated. Meanwhile, maintaining a representation when 
distractors are around require s agents holding the 
execution and believing the incoming data is noisy and 
useless in updating beliefs. This dilemma offers a chance 
of biasing the belief updating towards either the current 
beliefs or the current incoming data from the lower level 
of sen sorium. When it is used in the former way, the 
posterior beliefs are kept close to the prior belief. This is 
where the cultural effect influences perception. Given the 
hierarchical nature of the generative model, when the 
epistemic value is computed, the h igher-level precision 
modulation determines which expectation would be 
encoded in the hierarchy [ 61], and this expectation is 
shared expectations that formed through shared cultural 
practices (see Fig. 2 for a summary). The communication 
between local envi ronments and the associated practices 
leads to particular patterns of coordinated attention from 
participants [ 62], [63]. These patterns have dynamical 
attractors that guide action-perception loop towards certain 
states and outcomes rather than others, and these attractors 
are hierarchically deployed since they are induced by 
sequence of states which are hierarchically nested. This 
means that it is possible to generate sequences of 
sequences. Agents that are equipped with the same 
generative model synchroni sed indeed to the same 
attractors when they are engaged in the communicative 
setting [ 64]. This may be how the cross -cultural effect 
evolved. 
V. AN EXPLANATION FOR THE PREVIOUS 
EXPERIMENTS 
In this part, we aim to reexplain the two neural studies 
by using the active inference framework introduced above. 
Before doing so, it is helpful to look back on the studies 
we discussed at the beginning. Hedden assessed the fMRI 
responses when participants were doing both absolute 
(ignoring the visual context) and relative (considering the 
visual context) judgements under different conditions 
(congruent and incongruent) [12]. Participants were either 
from Western cultural context or East Asian community. 
This probably is the first neural study of the cross-cultural 
phenomenon, the results of which denied the existence of 
significant behavioural effects. The authors found no 
behavioural culture effect for accuracy or reaction times, 
albeit faster reaction time and more accurate judgements 
International Journal of Pharma Medicine and Biological Sciences Vol. 12, No. 1, January 2023
7
in congruent trails in comparison to the incongruent trials. 
However, they did find the above-threshold activities at the 
neural level in higher -order cortices (frontal, parietal, 
temporal) that are involved in cognitive control, attention 
and working memory when participants were doing 
culturally non -preferred judgements, they hence 
concluded the cross -cultural effect is involved in the 
simplest activities by endorsing attention. These findings 
could be explained in two aspects: the first is how attention 
mechanism selectively responds to cult ure favoured 
stimuli; and how participants actively resolve the 
uncertainty while holding the execution to the culturally 
favoured stimuli. 
 
Figure 2.  A simple cortical hierarchical model with ascending prediction errors and descending predictions. 
Neurobiologically, the precision weighting (attention) is 
a parameter that does not change with time and is highly 
experience-dependent. This means, the updating of γ 
resembles associations between short and long  term 
changes in synaptic connections [ 64]. It is an emergent 
phenomenon and signals that the generative model 
contains prior beliefs, and the log -precision of these prior 
beliefs is redistributed in context sensitive fashion. Given 
the state -dependent nat ure of posterior beliefs, we could 
thus state that different priors select different types of 
sensory information. That is, agents tend to actively 
sample certain types of outcomes with respect to their prior 
expectations shaped by different culture niches  and visit 
the most familiar sensory states again and again [6 5]. The 
prior, or hidden cause generates expected information gain 
(i.e., Bayesian Surprise), such that only the targets that can 
induce high -precision prediction errors that could be 
perceived. 
In behavioural experiments investigating the cultural 
effect, with the absence of cues, the precision information 
is encoded in the probabilistic contexts (or states) 
generated from the task requirements, in which two causes 
are expressed. The judgment task carried out by Hedden et 
al introduced two sets of hidden states, namely Rule and 
Categories. A scene can be perceived in two ways, 
according to rules, either by focusing on the object or the 
combination of the objects and the peripheral box. The two 
categories correspond to objects (i.e., S line) and the 
combination of the objects and the peripheral boxes (i.e., 
Sline+box). These two outcome modalities generate 4 
outcome possibilities in total that deviate from participants’ 
normal expectations. The firs t outcome modality Rule 
unambiguously cues the context. This process is exactly as 
same as how the endogenous and exogenous cues excite 
the hidden causes in Posner Paradigm and then hidden 
causes drive two hidden states bias the precision towards 
the most favourite (valid) information. These causes are 
shaped by encoding the affordance of culture niche in real 
social life into tonic dopamine firing levels [5 6], [66], 
since consistent results of certain actions in certain culture 
communities furnish reliable  prediction errors, and this 
attracts the actions towards the most revisited repertoire of 
hidden states. Put in other words, the hidden cause shows 
a long-term persistence that shortens the reaction time and 
requires extra evidence accumulation to be reve rsed. The 
active sampling action reports participants’ beliefs about 
the category of the scene categorised under the precision 
of the Rule. Further, Rule category exists at the higher 
level of the hierarchy of the MDP model since it governs 
how other modal ities generate outcomes and the real 
perception result is a function of  
Rule hidden states (e.g., sampling the length of the line 
when the rule is Focus Object will get a right feedback). 
Modulating the precision of rules leads to a change in 
perception outcomes. Mirza et al simulated a colour/shape 
task in which both colour and shape features can be used 
to sample a scene [5 9]. When increasing the precision of 
one rule to the maximal level (i.e., the colour rule) while 
decreasing that of the other to zero  (i.e.,the shape rule), 
participants selectively percept the outcomes generated by 
the high-precision rule (i.e.,colour) and neglect the shape 
outcomes totally. However, when the precision of both 
International Journal of Pharma Medicine and Biological Sciences Vol. 12, No. 1, January 2023
8
rules is increased, participants attend two targets generated 
by the two hidden causes without neglecting any targets. 
Similarly, we can assume that simply by changing 𝛾 
values, the behaviour differences could be captured. For 
westerners, 𝛾 value for R line may relatively higher than 
that of R line+box, which means participants have a high 
posterior confidence over current policy, namely focusing 
on object information. For Asians, the other R line+box has 
higher 𝛾 value that drives them in search of information 
from the combination of object with others. This analysis 
may indicate the substantial cognitive differences across 
cultures is objective and significant behavioral differences 
could be observed. However, it  is important to notice that 
the behavioral indices of cultural effect for accuracy and 
reaction time are similar across Westerners and East 
Asians, besides, participants were faster and more accurate 
in congruent trials in comparison to the incongruent trials. 
That is, when the cultural expectations are violated, the 
reflexive did not slow down the reaction time albeit some 
costs of accuracy were paid. This may because the extra 
attentional load is recruited to reduce prediction errors. In 
the incongruent condition, participants were required to 
make judgements to the stimuli they did not habitually 
attend to. So, participants need to retain habitual responses 
to the cultural favoured stimuli while planning movements 
by reducing the epistemic value. The app earance of the 
stimuli in the non -expected direction induces a shift of 
attention and rearrangement of the ocular motor program, 
leading to redirect fovea to the place the attention beam 
light is shifted to [67]. This change could interfere with the 
habitual system, thus slow down the reaction time. As what 
has been implied above, the neural networks of attention 
and salience are different anatomically. The salience is 
thought to be mapped in the superior colliculus and relies 
on motor control which interacts with attention system and 
elicits actions according to the affordance the salience has 
offered [68], [69]. It is possible that  the messages from 
cortex (attention) to colliculus (salience) are prediction 
errors [40]. Given both groups were undergoing th e same 
process, that is to minimise the expected free energy, this 
may result in overall the same reaction time yet increased 
errors (since retaining the response is hard according to 
Ponsner et al.) [47]. 
The same analysis could account for the three -stimulus 
oddball task carried out by Lewis et al. To recap briefly, 
the authors investigated neural responses to targets and 
novel stimuli by using a 3 -stimulus novelty P3 event 
related potential design. Participants were required to 
respond to the targets ‘6’ while being distracted by novelty 
stimuli whose possibility is the same as that of the targets. 
No main cultural effect was found in this experiment. 
However, culture significantly interacted with the 
condition, and condition interacted with Electrode. Th e 
relationship between culture and Electrodes is mediated by 
self-construal. That is, westerners attend to targets more 
easily while Asians tend to pay more attention to 
contextual information. Different from the Hedden et al’ 
paper, in which participants need to respond to both the 
typical and atypical stimuli, participants in oddball task 
were required to respond only to the target number. For 
Westerners, this type of target easily activates the hidden 
state of Starget which generates the objects, leading  to their 
accurate responses to the targets. Whilst the precision of 
hidden state S target is lower than S target+deviate, resulting in a 
consistent attention to the relationship between the current 
and upcoming stimuli to minimise the expected fee energy. 
The different amplitudes of P300 component are a piece of 
evidence. 
According to Donchin and Coles [2 4], agents are 
waiting for certain types of information that are expected 
according to the current context created by the task. We 
now know this information is the type of targets that is able 
to induce high -precision prediction errors. The P300 
component is a sign of the appearance of this type of 
stimuli. It is a sign of Bayesian surprise, the epistemic 
value that is expected to gain, but the certainty abou t the 
data is low. It manifests the changes in the environment 
that help to update the current context to adjust the changes. 
Not all odds in the environment induce this event -related 
potential. Only the segments of the context that are 
meaningful to the tasks are likely to induce the revision of 
the generative model [70]. To test how responses to the 
invalid targets change when jointly put together with 
attended targets, Feldman and Friston presented valid 
(stimuli that are easily captivated by attention a round 100 
ms after the onset of stimuli) and invalid targets in 
conjunction and found that the response to the invalid 
targets is half of that of valid ones [32].  
The valid targets will lead to the increased N1 amplitude 
due to their ability to win the at tention resources by 
attenuating the invalid targets, but a reduced P3 amplitude, 
since no prediction error needs to be explained away. On 
the contrary, the invalid targets generate decreased N1 and 
increased P3, meaning the prediction error needs to be 
reduced and the higher order context should be updated 
[71], [72]. This explains well the Lewis et al.’s results that 
the European Americans have a higher P3b amplitude 
singling their attention on changes of objective targets 
which are expected to update their posterior beliefs, while 
East Asian Americans’ greater novelty P3a component 
shows their generative  models encodes high precision of 
relationship information and thus easily attend to targets 
that may bring changes to this relationship information. 
This has been proved by Wright et al . by using a 
Hierarchical Gaussian Filter [1 4]. East Asian ’s higher 
probability learning rate shows a faster updating of beliefs 
about probabilistic relationships thus a high precision (or 
covariance) of context. Ji et al. also showed that Asians are 
more confident in differences in covariation and have a 
high road-field dependence [4]. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
Early research on cross -cultural effect focused on 
sensitivity to social cues and conditional context, and the 
cognitive studies mainly emphasised attention to the 
perceptual field. But these behavioural studies are not 
well-controlled, nor well replicated. The two neural 
experiments mentioned in the body part studied the neural 
correlates that underpin these cognitive differences and 
limited the cultural effect to the attention mechanism. We 
International Journal of Pharma Medicine and Biological Sciences Vol. 12, No. 1, January 2023
9
tried to give a computational model to expl ain how 
attention affects the way people sampling the world. We 
argued that the hierarchical nature of human inference 
leads to nested network, the plasticity of connections 
between levels is modulated by the γ value, which is 
basically ‘attention’. Howeve r, there are two aspects of 
attention, namely gain control and salience, the former lies 
at the highest level, and is formed through coordinating 
with people living in the same community. This value 
resists to change and accommodates many cross -cultural 
phenomena. The latter can be found in low level task 
relevant inference processes, such that people can change 
their expectations according to changes in the environment. 
This is why no behaviour differences were found in neural 
experiments. The communicatio n between these two 
aspects of attention forms the paths of minimising 
expected free energy. 
ABBREVIATIONS 
MDP: Markov decision process 
P300: A component of the event -related brain potential 
which is controlled by the subjective probability and task 
demanding. It signals agents’ model of the environment 
needs to be revised. In this article, the appearance of P300 
component means the context, which is encoded by hidden 
states of the observation, is being updated. 
P3a: The novelty -related component which prov ed 
particularly sensitive to deviations from the immediate 
stimulus context that is created by the standard and target 
stimuli in the three -stimulus variation of the oddball task. 
The more perceptually discrepant the stimulus is compared 
to the standard an d target stimuli, the greater novelty P3a 
amplitude will be elicited. For example, car horn is 
perceptually salient than target stimuli which forms a 
temporal context. 
P3b: A late positive component which reflects the revision 
of the long -lasting probabili stic context encoded by 
inferred hidden states. 
CONFLICT OF INTEREST 
The author declares no conflict of interest. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. E. Nisbett, and Y. Miyamoto, “The influence of culture: Holistic 
versus analytic perception ,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences, vol. 9, 
no. 10, pp. 467-473, Oct. 2005. 
[2] S. Kitayama, S. Duffy, T. Kawamura, and J. T. Larsen, “Perceiving 
an object and its context in different cultures: A cultural look at new 
look,” Psychological Science, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 201-206, 2003. 
[3] T. Masuda and R. E. Nisbett, “Attending holistically versus 
analytically: Comparing the context sensitivity of Japanese and 
Americans,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, vol. 81, 
no. 5, p. 922, Nov. 2001. 
[4] L. J. Ji, K. Pen, and R. E. Nisbett, “Culture, control, and perception 
of relationships in the environment ,” Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, vol. 78, p. 943, May 2000. 
[5] I. Choi and R. E. Nisbett, “Cultural psychology of surprise: Holistic 
theories and recognition of contradiction,” Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, vol. 79, no. 6, p. 890, Dec. 2000. 
[6] I. Choi, R. E. Nisbett , and A.  Norenzayan, “Causal attribution 
across cultures: Variation and universality,” Psychological Bulletin, 
vol. 125, p. 47, Jan. 1999. 
[7] I. Choi and R. E. Nisbett, “Situational salience and cultural 
differences in the correspondence bias and actor -observer bias ,” 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , vol. 24, pp. 949-960, 
Sep. 1998. 
[8] H. A.  Witkin and D. R.  Goodenough, “Field dependence and 
interpersonal behavior,” Psychological Bulletin, vol. 84, no. 4, p. 
661, July 1977. 
[9] D. J.  Simons, S. L . Franconeri, and R. L.  Reimer, “Change 
blindness in the absence of a visual disruption,” Perception, vol. 29, 
pp. 1143-1154, Oct. 2000. 
[10] T. Masuda and R. E. Nisbett, “Culture and change blindness ,” 
Cognitive Science, vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 381-399, Mar. 2006. 
[11] J. Spencer-Rodgers, M. J.  Williams, and  K. Peng, “Cultural 
differences in expectations of change and tolerance for 
contradiction: A decade of empirical research ,” Personality and 
Social Psychology Review, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 296-312, Aug. 2010. 
[12] T. Hedden, S. Ketay, A. Aron, H. R. Markus, and J. D. Gabrieli, 
“Cultural influences on neural substrates of attentional contr ol,” 
Psychological Science, vol. 19, pp. 12-17, Jan. 2008. 
[13] R. S. Lewis, S. G. Goto, and L. L. Kong, “Culture and context: East 
Asian American and European American differences in P3 event -
related potentials and self -construal,” Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, vol. 34, pp. 623-634, May 2008.  
[14] N. D. Wright, et al., “Cultural effects on computational metrics of 
spatial and temporal context,” Sci. Rep., vol. 8, p. 2027, Feb. 2018. 
[15] M. Jahanshahi, I. Obeso, J. C. Rothwell, and  J. A. Obeso, “A 
fronto–striato–subthalamic–pallidal network for goal -directed and 
habitual inhibition ,” Nature Reviews Neuroscience , vol. 16, pp. 
719-732, Dec. 2015. 
[16] C. R. Gerfen, T. M. Engber, L. C. Mahan, Z. V. I Susel, T. N. Chase, 
F. J. Monsma , and D. R. Sibley, “D1 and D2 dopamine receptor -
regulated gene expression of striatonigral and striatopallidal 
neurons,” Science, vol. 250 no. 4986, pp. 1429-1432, Dec. 1990. 
[17] R. Kaplan and K. J. Friston, “Planning and navigation as active 
inference,” Biological Cybernetics, vol. 112, no. 4, pp. 323-343, 
Aug. 2018. 
[18] M. B. Mirza, R. A. Adams, C. D. Mathys, and K. J. Friston, “Scene 
construction, visual foraging, and active inference ,” Frontiers in 
Computational Neuroscience, vol. 10, pp. 56, Jun. 2016. 
[19] K. Friston, P . Schwartenbeck, T.  FitzGerald, M.  Moutoussis, T.  
Behrens, and R. J. Dolan, “The anatomy of choice: Dopamine and 
decision-making,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 
B: Biological Sciences , vol. 369, no. 1655, pp. 20130481, Nov. 
2014 . 
[20] A. Nambu, “A new dynamic model of the cortico -basal ganglia 
loop,” Progress in Brain Research, vol. 143, pp. 461-466, Jan. 2004. 
[21] D. Rahnev, H.  Lau, and F. P. De Lange , “Prior expectation 
modulates the interaction between sensory and prefrontal regions in 
the human brain,” Journal of Neuroscience , vol. 31, no. 29, pp. 
10741-10748, July 2011. 
[22] T. Parr and K. J. Friston, “Attention or salience?” Current Opinion 
in Psychology, vol. 29, pp. 1-5, Oct. 2019. 
[23] R. J. Johnson, “The amplitude of the P300 component of the event-
related potential : Review and synthesis ,” Advances in 
Psychophysiology, vol. 3, pp. 69-137, Apr. 1988. 
[24] E. Donchin and M. G. Coles, “Is the P300 component a 
manifestation of context updating?” Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 
vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 357-374, Sep. 1988. 
[25] T. S. Braver, J. D. Cohen, L. E. Nystrom, J. Jonides, E. E. Smith, 
and D. C. Noll, “A parametric study of prefrontal cortex 
involvement in human working memory,” Neuroimage, vol. 5, pp. 
49-62, Jan. 1997. 
[26] K. J. Friston and K. E. Stephan, “Free-energy and the brain ,” 
Synthese, vol. 159, no. 3, pp. 417-458, Dec. 2007. 
[27] K. Friston, “The free -energy principle: A unified brain theory? ” 
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 127-138, Feb. 
2010. 
[28] K. Friston, “Life as we know it ,” Journal of the Royal Society 
Interface, vol. 10, no. 86, pp. 20130475, Sep. 2013.  
[29] P. B. Badcock, K. J.  Friston, M. J.  Ramstead, A. Ploeger, and J. 
Hohwy, “The hierarchically mechanistic mind: An evolutionary 
systems theory of the human brain, cognition, and behavior ,” 
Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, vol. 19, pp. 1319-
1351, Jun. 2019. 
[30] K. Akatsuka, T. Wasaka, H. Nakata, T. Kida, and R. Kakigi, “The 
effect of stimulus probability on the somatosensory mismatch field,” 
International Journal of Pharma Medicine and Biological Sciences Vol. 12, No. 1, January 2023
10
Experimental Brain Research, vol. 181, no. 4, pp. 607-614, Aug. 
2007. 
[31] D. W. Franklin and D. M. Wolpert, “Computational mechanisms of 
sensorimotor control,” Neuron., vol. 72, no. 3, pp. 425-442, Nov. 
2011. 
[32] H. Feldman and K. Friston, “Attention, uncertainty, and free-
energy,” Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, vol. 4, p. 215, Dec. 
2010. 
[33] W. Schultz, “Predictive reward signal of dopamine neurons, ” 
Journal of Neurophysiology, vol. 80, no. 1, pp. 1-27, 1998. 
[34] M. Botvinick and M. Toussaint, “Planning as inference,” Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, vol. 16, no. 10, pp. 485-488, Oct. 2012. 
[35] H. Attias, “Planning by probabilistic inference ,” in Proc. the  
International Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 
9-16, 2013 
[36] K. Friston, F. Rigoli, D. Ognibene, C. Mathys, T. Fitzgerald, and G. 
Pezzulo, “Active inference and epistemic value ,” Cognitive 
Neuroscience, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 187-214, 2015. 
[37] R. Kanai, Y. Komura, S. Shipp, and K. Friston, “Cerebral 
hierarchies: Predictive processing, precision and the pulvinar ,” 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological 
Sciences, vol. 370, no. 1668, p. 20140169, May, 2015. 
[38] L. Da Costa, N. Sajid, T. Parr, K. Friston, and R. Smith (September 
2020). The relationship between dynamic programming and active 
inference: The discrete, finite-horizon case. arXiv preprint. [Online] 
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.08111 
[39] J. Hohwy, The Predictive Mind. London: Oxford University Press, 
2013. 
[40] T. Parr and K. J. Friston, “Uncertainty, epistemics and active 
inference,” Journal of the Royal Society Interface, vol. 14, no. 136, 
p. 20170376, Nov. 2017. 
[41] H. R.  Brown and K. J. Friston, “Dynamic causal modelling of 
precision and synaptic gain in visual perception —an EEG study,” 
Neuroimage, vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 223-231, Oct. 2012. 
[42] K. Friston and S. Kiebel, “Predictive coding under the free-energy 
principle,” Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society B: 
Biological sciences, vol. 364, no. 1521, pp. 1211-1221, May 2009. 
[43] K. J. Friston, K. E. Stephan, R. Montague, and R. J. Dolan, 
“Computational psychiatry: The brain as a phantastic organ ,” The 
Lancet Psychiatry, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 148-158, July 2014. 
[44] J. M. Kilner, K. J. Friston, and C. D. Frith, “Predictive coding: An 
account of the mirror neuron system,” Cognitive Processing, vol. 8, 
no. 3, pp. 159-166, Apr. 2007. 
[45] S. A. Hillyard, E. K. Vogel, and S. J. Luck, “Sensory gain control 
(amplification) as a mechanism of selective attention: 
electrophysiological and neuroimaging evidence ,” Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society of London , Series B: Biological 
Sciences, vol. 353, no. 1373, pp. 1257-1270, Aug. 1998. 
[46] G. Decoand E. T. Rolls, “A neurodynamical cortical model of visual 
attention and invariant object recognition,” Vision Research, vol. 44, 
no. 6, pp. 621-642, Mar. 2004. 
[47] M. I. Posner, C. R. Snyder, and B. J. Davidson, “Attention and the 
detection of signals,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 
vol. 109, no. 2, pp. 160, Jun. 1980. 
[48] S. Yantis and J. Jonides, “Abrupt visual onsets and selective 
attention: evidence from visual search ,” Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, vol. 10, no. 5, p. 
601, Oct. 1984. 
[49] J. Theeuwes, “Exogenous and endogenous control of attention: The 
effect of visual onsets and offsets ,” Perception & Psychophysics, 
vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 83-90, Jan. 1991. 
[50] C. Büchel, J. Morris, R. J. Dolan, and K. J. Friston, “Brain systems 
mediating aversive conditioning: an event -related fMRI study, ” 
Neuron, vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 947-957, May 1998. 
[51] I. C. Fiebelkorn, M. A. Pinsk, and S. Kastner, “A dynamic interplay 
within the frontoparietal network underlies rhythmic spatial 
attention,” Neuron, vol. 99, no. 4, pp. 842-853, Aug. 2018. 
[52] A. Kori, N. Miyashita, M. Kato, O. Hikosaka, S. Usui, and M. 
Matsumura. “Eye movements in monkeys with local dopamine 
depletion in the caudate nucleus. II. Deficits in voluntary saccades,” 
Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 15, pp. 928-941, Jan. 1995. 
[53] W. Schultz, K. Preuschoff, C. Camerer, M. Hsu, C. D. Fiorillo, P. 
N. Tobler, and P. Bossaerts, “Explicit neural signals reflect ing 
reward uncertainty ,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society B: Biological Sciences, vol. 363, no. 1511, pp. 3801-3811, 
Dec. 2008. 
[54] P. Schwartenbeck, T. H. FitzGerald, C. Mathys, R. Dolan, and K. 
Friston, “The dopaminergic midbrain encodes the expected 
certainty about desired outcomes ,” Cerebral Cortex, vol. 25, pp. 
3434-3445, Oct. 2015. 
[55] L. Itti and P. Baldi, “Bayesian surprise attracts human attention ,” 
Vision Research, vol. 49, pp. 1295-1306, Oct. 2009.  
[56] K. Friston, R. Adams, L. Perrinet, and M. Breakspear, “Perceptions 
as hypotheses: Saccades as experiments,” Frontiers in Psychology, 
vol. 3, p. 151, May 2012. 
[57] J. Pearl, Models, Reasoning and Inference. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press, 2001. 
[58] J. Hawkins, D. George, and J. Niemasik, “Sequence memory for 
prediction, inference and behaviour ,” Philosophical Transactions 
of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, vol. 364, no. 1521, pp. 
1203-1209, May 2009. 
[59] M. B. Mirza, R. A. Adams, K. Friston, and T. Parr, “Introducing a 
Bayesian model of selective attention based on active inference ,” 
Scientific Reports, vol. 9, pp. 1-22, Jan. 2019.   
[60] K. Friston, T. FitzGerald, F, Rigoli, P. Schwartenbeck, and G. 
Pezzulo, “Active inference: a process theory,” Neural Computation, 
vol. 29, pp. 1-49, Jan. 2017.   
[61] M. J.  Ramstead, S. P. Veissiè re, and L. J. Kirmayer, “Cultural 
affordances: Scaffolding local worlds through shared intentionality 
and regimes of attention,” Frontiers in Psychology, vol. 7, p. 1090, 
July 2016. 
[62] M. D. Kirchhoff, “Species of realization and the free energy 
principle,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy, vol. 93, no. 4, pp. 
706-723, Oct. 2015. 
[63] A. Clark , Surfing Uncertainty: Prediction, Action, and the 
Embodied Mind, Oxford University Press, 2015. 
[64] K. Friston and C.  Frith, “A duet for one ,” Consciousness and 
Cognition, vol. 36, pp. 390-405, Nov. 2015.  
[65] G. Pezzulo and P. Cisek, “Navigating the affordance landscape: 
Feedback control as a process model of behavior and cognition ,” 
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 414-424, Jun. 2016. 
[66] S. Veissiè re, “Neuroplacebos: When healing is a no -brainer,” in 
Casting LighT on the Dark Side of Brain Imaging, Academic Press, 
2019, pp. 93-98.  
[67] G. Rizzolatti, L. Riggio, I. Dascola, and C. Umiltá , “Reorienting 
attention across the horizontal and vertical meridians: Evidence in 
favor of a premotor theory of attention,” Neuropsychologia, vol. 25, 
no. 1, pp. 31-40, Jan. 1987. 
[68] R. Veale, Z. M. Hafed, and M. Yoshida, “How is visual salience  
computed in the brain? Insights from behaviour, neurobiology and 
modelling,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: 
Biological Sciences, vol. 372, no. 1714, p. 20160113, Feb. 2017. 
[69] G. J. Zelinsky and J. W. Bisley, “The what, where, and why of 
priority maps and their interactions with visual working memory,” 
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, vol. 1339, no. 1, p. 
154, Mar. 2015. 
[70] J. Polich, “Updating P300: An integrative theory of P3a and P3b,” 
Clinical Neurophysiology, vol. 118, no. 10, pp. 2128-2148, Oct. 
2007. 
[71] K. J. Friston, R. Rosch, T. Parr, C. Price, and H. Bowman, “Deep 
temporal models and active inference ,” Neuroscience & 
Biobehavioral Reviews, vol. 90, pp. 486-501, July 2018. 
[72] J. Vibell, C. Klinge, M. Zampini, C. Spence, and A. C. Nobre, 
“Temporal order is coded temporally in the brain: early event -
related potential latency shifts underlying prior entry in a cross -
modal temporal order judgment task ,” Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience, vol. 19, pp. 109-120, Jan. 2007. 
 
Copyright © 20 23 by th e authors. This is an open access article 
distributed under the Creative Commons Attribution License  (CC BY-
NC-ND 4.0 ), which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any 
medium, provided that the article is properly cited, the use is non -
commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Pharma Medicine and Biological Sciences Vol. 12, No. 1, January 2023
11
Yao Wen  was born in November 1986 in 
China, she received MA in Linguistics from 
the Division of Psychology and Language 
Sciences at University College London in the 
UK in 2019. 
She has recently worked at CIBR Medical Co, 
Ltd, working on fMRI data analysis in both 
Beijing and London, where she developed a 
strong interest in the neural mechanisms of 
decision making. 
 
International Journal of Pharma Medicine and Biological Sciences Vol. 12, No. 1, January 2023
12