Current Research in Neurobiology 3 (2022) 100036
Available online 1 April 2022
2665-945X/© 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/).
An active inference model of conscious access: How cognitive action 
selection reconciles the results of report and no-report paradigms 
Christopher J. Whyte
a , *
, Jakob Hohwy
b
, Ryan Smith
c 
a
MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 
b
Centre for Consciousness & Contemplative Studies, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia 
c
Laureate Institute for Brain Research, Tulsa, OK, USA   
ARTICLE INFO  
Keywords: 
Active inference 
Conscious access 
Consciousness 
Prefrontal cortex 
No-report paradigms 
ABSTRACT  
Cognitive theories of consciousness, such as global workspace theory and higher-order theories, posit that 
frontoparietal circuits play a crucial role in conscious access. However, recent studies using no-report paradigms 
have posed a challenge to cognitive theories by demonstrating conscious accessibility in the apparent absence of 
prefrontal cortex (PFC) activation. To address this challenge, this paper presents a computational model of 
conscious access, based upon active inference, that treats working memory gating as a cognitive action. We 
simulate a visual masking task and show that late P3b-like event-related potentials (ERPs), and increased PFC 
activity, are induced by the working memory demands of self-report generation. When reporting demands are 
removed, these late ERPs vanish and PFC activity is reduced. These results therefore reproduce, and potentially 
explain, results from no-report paradigms. However, even without reporting demands, our model shows that 
simulated PFC activity on visible stimulus trials still crosses the threshold for reportability – maintaining the link 
between PFC and conscious access. Therefore, our simulations show that evidence provided by no-report par -
adigms does not necessarily contradict cognitive theories of consciousness.   
1. Introduction 
The neuroscience of consciousness has made considerable progress 
within the past two decades, with growing consensus in a number of 
areas. For example, almost all major theories of visual consciousness 
agree that recurrent activity is a necessary element ( Lamme, 2006 ; 
Mashour et al., 2020 ; Tononi et al., 2016 ). Nevertheless, there is still 
substantial disagreement. Perceptual theories (e.g., local recurrency 
theory ( Lamme, 2006 ) and integrated information theory ( Tononi et al., 
2016 )) both argue that recurrent activity in posterior cortical regions is 
(in some sense) sufficient for consciousness. In contrast, cognitive the -
ories, such as the global neuronal workspace (GNW; Dehaene and 
Changeux, 2011 ; Mashour et al., 2020 ) theory and higher order theories 
(HOT; Brown et al., 2019 ), argue that consciousness requires perceptual 
information to be accessed by, or at least be accessible to, structures 
within prefrontal cortex (PFC). 
In support of cognitive theories, consciousness robustly correlates 
with both PFC activity and late event-related potentials (ERPs; i.e., 
indicative of post-perceptual cognitive processing) when measured via 
subjective report. For example, a meta-analysis of 19 bistable perception 
and phenomenal masking studies ( Bisenius et al., 2015 ) found that a 
network of regions in extrastriate, temporal, prefrontal, and parietal 
cortices showed above-chance activation when contrasting conscious 
(seen) vs. unconscious (unseen) conditions. Likewise, in both masking 
and attentional blink paradigms, early ERP components have typically 
not displayed substantial differences between seen and unseen condi -
tions, while the late P3b component has been found to show a large 
increase in amplitude during seen vs. unseen condition ( Salti et al., 
2012 ; Sergent et al., 2005 ; Ye et al., 2019 ). 
More recently, however, these results have come under considerable 
scrutiny. Specifically, no-report paradigms, which do not require the 
collection of explicit subjective reports, have shown that prefrontal 
cortex activity is greatly reduced, and late ERPs vanish, when reporting 
demands are removed ( Tsuchiya et al., 2015 ). In a no-report variant of a 
binocularly rivalry paradigm, Frassle and colleagues ( Frassle et al., 
2014 ) found that, when measured via reports, perceptual transitions 
were associated with the activation of a network of regions within the 
superior parietal cortex and bilateral middle frontal gyrus. However, 
when reporting demands were removed, the activity in bilateral middle 
frontal gyrus dropped below significance. Using large-scale intracranial 
* Corresponding author. MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, 15 Chaucer Rd, Cambridge, CB2 7EF, UK. 
E-mail address: christopherjackwhyte@gmail.com (C.J. Whyte).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Current Research in Neurobiology 
journal homep age: www.scien cedirect.co m/journal/cu rrent-resea rch-in-neur obiology 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crneur.2022.100036 
Received 11 January 2022; Received in revised form 8 March 2022; Accepted 18 March 2022   
Current Research in Neurobiology 3 (2022) 100036
2
recordings (ECoG), Noy and colleagues (Noy et al., 2015) presented 
participants with a stream of images (all above threshold for conscious 
perception). In one condition participants also performed a one-back 
working memory task, while the other condition only required them 
to passively view the stimuli. They found that the magnitude of fron -
toparietal activity was substantially reduced in the passive perception 
condition. Similarly, Pitts and colleagues (Pitts et al., 2014) used a 
no-report variant of an inattentional blindness paradigm (i.e., where 
reports were gathered after blocks of trials as opposed to on each trial) 
and found that the P3b was driven by task relevance, and not perceptual 
awareness. This result has since been conceptually replicated and 
extended in a standard phenomenal masking paradigm by Cohen and 
colleagues (Cohen et al., 2020). Despite participants not reporting their 
experience in the no-report condition, Cohen and colleagues found that 
they still displayed a remarkable degree of accuracy on an incidental 
memory task for unmasked trials. This was not the case for trials with 
masked stimuli, reducing the plausibility of the objection that the 
unmasked stimuli may not have been consciously seen on no-report 
trials. This set of results has been interpreted by many as strong evi -
dence in favour of perceptual theories of consciousness. It is suggested 
that PFC may modulate consciousness, but that it does not play a 
necessary role. In other words, posterior cortical processing is argued to 
be sufficient for experience on its own (Tsuchiya et al., 2015). 
Despite these challenges to cognitive theories, new evidence from 
invasive neurophysiology in non-human primates has shown that, even 
in the absence of report, the contents of consciousness can be reliably 
decoded from PFC (Kapoor et al., 2020). Further, state fluctuations in 
PFC appear to precede perceptual transitions, suggesting a causal role 
for PFC in consciousness (Dwarakanath et al., 2020). Although not 
within a no-report paradigm, a very similar result was reported in a 
cohort of neurosurgical patients implanted with intracranial electrodes. 
Specifically, Gelbard-Sagiv et al. (2018) found that medial frontal ac -
tivity preceded internally-driven perceptual switches. More recently 
still, in an auditory no-report paradigm conducted with human partici -
pants, Sergent and colleagues (Sergent et al., 2021) found that, even in 
the absence of report, conscious access correlated with a bifurcation in 
neural activity (recorded via EEG) reminiscent of the type of non-linear 
ignition predicted by GNW theory. Crucially, when they localised the 
EEG signal, conscious access was associated with activity in inferior PFC. 
Given that PFC activity seems to play a crucial role in consciousness in 
these studies, but is attenuated in no-report paradigms, it remains an 
open and important question why reporting demands induce late ERPs 
and enhance PFC activity. In other words, it remains unclear what the 
difference in cognitive processing is between report and no-report con -
ditions that explains the dramatic change in the neural correlates of 
consciousness. 
Here we present a computational model of visual conscious access, 
based upon active inference, that attempts to answer this question. In 
previous work (Whyte and Smith, 2021), we used a two-level partially 
observable Markov decision process (POMDP) to model the behavioural 
and electrophysiological correlates of visual consciousness in minimal 
contrast paradigms, based on the domain-general neural process theory 
accompanying active inference (Da Costa et al., 2020; Friston et al., 
2017; Sajid et al., 2021; Smith et al., 2022). Specifically, we showed how 
this two-level POMDP could reproduce the dissociation between the P3b 
and conscious access. Although this work aimed to explain existing re -
sults, the model also generated further predictions about the interaction 
between attention and expectation that have subsequently been 
confirmed in an extension of the inattentional blindness paradigm, 
lending some credence to the validity of our explanation. Specifically, 
we predicted that valid expectations would reduce the amplitude of the 
P3b, but only when the stimulus was task-relevant, which is exactly 
what has subsequently been found (Schlossmacher et al., 2020). In this 
previous work, we modelled the dissociation of the P3b and conscious 
access as a result of the manipulation of attention. However, this 
explanation does not straightforwardly generalise to other no-report 
paradigms. 
This paper presents an extension of our previous model to more 
general no-report paradigms by treating working memory as a type of 
cognitive action (Limanowski and Friston, 2018) – conceptually similar 
to other models positing action-like neural mechanisms for selectively 
gating contents into working memory (e.g., involving PFC-basal ganglia 
loops; O’Reilly and Frank, 2006) – but applied specifically to subjective 
reports. This is motivated by the fact that the frontoparietal networks 
appealed to by cognitive theories are known to overlap with selective 
attention and working memory processes (Rottschy et al., 2012), and by 
the fact that these processes have been explicitly appealed to by previous 
cognitive theorists as integral to conscious access (Prinz, 2012). 
Building on this work, we use our model to simulate visual masking 
and show that the working memory demands associated with the gen -
eration of reports induce late P3b-like ERPs and enhance simulated PFC 
activity. In contrast, late ERPs vanish, and PFC activity is greatly 
reduced, when reporting demands are removed. Crucially, however, 
even when the model is not ‘asked’ to provide a subjective report (and 
therefore does not choose to maintain information in working memory), 
PFC activity on visible trials still rises above the threshold for reliable 
reportability immediately after stimulus presentation. We leverage this 
result to argue for an access-based account in which conscious percep -
tion is a matter of having sufficiently precise posterior beliefs to influ -
ence temporally deep policy selection (i.e., the selection of temporally 
extended action sequences, such as those involved in reporting). Spe -
cifically, our results suggest that if a participant had been asked to report 
their visual experience immediately after stimulus presentation, they 
would have reported seeing the stimulus, and that this is still a function of 
PFC activity in our model – associated with precise posterior beliefs at 
(temporally) deep levels of processing. 
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides a brief primer 
on active inference and the POMDP approach to modelling cognitive and 
perceptual processes. Section 3 outlines the structure of the specific 
generative model we employ (i.e., a model of how hidden causes outside 
of the brain generate sensory observations). Section 4 presents simula -
tions of phenomenal masking with and without reporting demands within 
this generative model, showing its ability to reproduce the neural cor -
relates of consciousness under both report and no-report conditions. We 
conclude in section 5 by highlighting the empirical predictions of the 
model. We also explore the implications of our results for the debate 
between cognitive and perceptual theories of consciousness and discuss 
the relationship between our model and prominent cognitive theories of 
consciousness. 
2. Methods 
2.1. A primer on active inference 
Active inference is a framework for modelling (approximately) Bayes 
optimal behaviour under an internal (generative) model of the world 
(for a gentle but detailed introduction, see Smith et al., 2022). The 
POMDP (partially observable Markov decision process) formulation of 
active inference uses generative models that incorporate perception, 
learning, and decision-making under uncertainty. These models assume 
discrete state and outcome spaces and discrete time steps. Inference 
within these models is performed through the application of message 
passing algorithms – most commonly marginal message passing (Parr 
et al., 2019). This exemplifies the broader approach of minimizing 
variational free energy (VFE) that active inference models leverage more 
generally. VFE is a tractable approximation to the difference between a 
generative model and the true states of the world generating observed 
outcomes (i.e., the generative process). Minimizing VFE allows the 
perception-action cycle to be cast as an optimisation problem, where 
perception corresponds to the process of inferring the hidden states that 
maximise the probability of observations (while also minimizing model 
complexity; i.e., keeping the inferred explanations of observations as 
C.J. Whyte et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
Current Research in Neurobiology 3 (2022) 100036
3
simple as possible). In turn, action selection corresponds to the process 
of inferring the action sequences (i.e., policies) that will both minimise 
uncertainty and bring about preferred outcomes, formally cast as ob -
servations with high prior probabilities in the model (so-called prior 
preferences see Friston et al., 2016 , 2017 ). Inference about optimal 
policies technically requires minimisation of the expected free energy 
(EFE) of future observations under each possible action sequence. Over 
the timescale of a single trial in a task, belief updates correspond to 
inference (i.e., updating beliefs about hidden states), while, over longer 
timescales, belief updating gives rise to learning (i.e., updating beliefs 
about the parameters of the generative model in order to increase pre -
dictive accuracy). 
The inference procedure in these models is based upon a likelihood 
mapping between a set of factorised hidden states ( s
τ
) and observations 
( o
τ
) at each timepoint τ , which encodes the probability of each obser -
vation given each possible hidden state, p ( o
τ
| s
τ
) . Inference further de -
pends on a model of the transitions between hidden states that would 
occur under each possible course of action or policy ( π ) , p ( s
τ + 1
| s
τ
, π ) . The 
likelihood mapping is specified by a set of matrices, denoted in Fig. 1 by 
the letter A , each of which describes the mapping between all hidden 
state factors and a distinct outcome modality. As mentioned above, to 
allow for interactions between hidden states and the observations they 
generate, they are factorised into distinct sets of outcome modalities, 
each with their own A matrix. The transition probabilities are encoded 
by a set of matrices denoted by the letter B (at least one matrix per 
hidden state factor), which describe the probability of a current state 
conditional on a choice of policy, past states, and expected future states. 
In active inference, actions are modelled as the direct control of state 
transitions by the agent. Each agent is equipped with a policy space that 
describes a set of allowable action sequences, where each allowable 
transition (i.e., action) at each time point is assigned a distinct B matrix. 
An agent ’ s prior preferences for particular observations, p ( o
τ
| C ) , are 
described by a set of matrices denoted by the letter C (one per outcome 
modality), which quantify the degree to which agents prefer, or are 
averse to, particular observations at each time point. Finally, prior be -
liefs about initial states, p ( s
τ = 1
) , are determined by a set of vectors 
denoted by the letter D (one per hidden state factor), which function 
analogously to the B matrices but for the hidden states at the first time 
point. The probability distributions encoded in A , B , C and D are each 
categorical distributions with Dirichlet priors. For details on the free 
energy functionals and update equations, we refer readers to Appen -
dix 1 ; for more in-depth walkthroughs, see ( Da Costa et al., 2020 ; Sajid 
et al., 2021 ; Smith et al., 2022 ). 
In hierarchical models, such as the model described in the following 
section, hidden states at the first level serve as observations at the second 
level (see Fig. 1 ). This affords inferences about deep temporal structure. 
For example, as shown in previous simulations of reading, the first level 
of a model can be used to infer single words from visual input, while the 
second level can be used to infer the narrative meaning entailed by se -
quences of words – where the latter process requires evidence to be 
accumulated over longer temporal scales ( Friston et al., 2017 ). 
A key feature of active inference is that it comes equipped with a 
detailed, domain-general neural process theory describing a proposed 
mapping between neurobiology and the equations governing belief 
updating (see Fig. 2 for a description of the relevant equations). Here we 
focus exclusively on the elements of the theory that map the update 
equations to electrophysiology. In this theory, posterior beliefs over 
each hidden state are mapped to firing rates in distinct neuronal pop -
ulations. The average membrane potential of these neuronal pop -
ulations, which controls their respective firing rates, is based on a 
depolarisation variable ( v ). The value of v is updated (denoted by ‘ ← ‘) 
based on a state prediction error term ( ε ): v ← v + ε (the equation for this 
state prediction error is shown in Fig. 2 ). This update entails that more 
surprising changes in beliefs about states (i.e., after a new observation) 
will generate greater changes in v . Depolarisation levels then update 
firing rates by applying a softmax (normalised exponential; σ ) function 
to beliefs over states, s ← σ ( v ) , which transforms v into a probability 
distribution. The use of the softmax function (which is simply a gener -
alisation of the sigmoid logistic function to vector inputs) to simulate 
average firing rates is based on the assumption made in mean-field 
models of neural dynamics that the average firing rate of a population 
can be treated as a sigmoid function of the average membrane potential 
( Breakspear, 2017 ; Da Costa et al., 2021 ). ERPs and local field potentials 
are modelled as the time derivative (i.e., rate of change) of the nor -
malised firing rate. It is worth highlighting the face validity of this setup. 
Because the depolarisation variable is not normalised, it can take both 
positive and negative values, like voltage; in contrast, after being nor -
malised by the softmax function, it is bounded between zero and one, 
like a normalised firing rate. 
2.2. A generative model of conscious access 
To model conscious access, both with and without subjective report, 
we simulated a phenomenal masking paradigm with a delay period 
between the presentation of the stimulus and the collection of a sub -
jective report in the report condition, and an extended ISI in the no- 
report condition. We introduced the delay period into the otherwise 
typical phenomenal masking paradigm to explicitly link the neural 
consequences of increased working memory demands to the functional 
pay offs facilitated by goal-directed working memory maintenance (i.e., 
the elevated neural activity associated with choosing to maintain a 
stimulus in working memory in order to successfully complete a task). 
Fig. 1. A graphical depiction of a hierarchical POMDP. Arrows show the de -
pendencies between variables (circles). Observations (purple) depend on hid -
den states (green), and state transitions are (partially) determined by policies 
( π ). This representation also highlights the role of the vectors/matrices 
(squares) in determining the conditional dependencies between variables. Ob -
servations are generated by hidden states described by the matrix A. The B 
matrix determines state transitions, which function as empirical priors. The D 
vector serves as the prior for initial states. When the B matrix is under the 
control of the agent, these state transitions (actions) depend upon the policy. 
The probability that a particular policy will be selected depends on the expected 
free energy ( G ) of the policy, which is (partially) dependent on the prior 
preferences specified by C . In hierarchical models such as this, beliefs at the 
second level provide priors for inference at the first level. In turn, posterior 
beliefs over hidden states at the first level function as observations for the 
second level (represented by the shading from green to purple). (For interpre -
tation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to 
the Web version of this article.) 
C.J. Whyte et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
Current Research in Neurobiology 3 (2022) 100036
4
This aspect of the task was inspired by previous unconscious working 
memory paradigms ( King et al., 2016 ; Soto et al., 2011 ; see Fig. 3 ). We 
also note that, even when asked to report experience directly after 
stimulus presentation, it is plausible to assume some (if minimal) 
working memory demand associated with holding that prior percept in 
mind to construct a report. As such, our results below do not depend on 
the presence of extended delay periods associated with traditional 
working memory tasks. They only depend on the assumption that, in 
relevant task trials, agents choose to engage in the (relatively) more 
effortful cognitive processes associated with generating reports after 
stimulus presentation. 
Our simulated task began by presenting the agent with a blank 
screen. At the second timepoint, the agent was presented with either a 
left- or right-oriented Gabor patch (the target stimulus) or with another 
blank screen. In the report condition, the agent was required to maintain 
the stimulus over a delay and to either report whether they had seen a 
Fig. 2. Neural process theory associated with active inference. The left portion of this figure shows the update equations and free energy functionals. Heuristically, 
state prediction errors ε score the (log) difference between the generative model and the approximate posterior after receiving an observation. Outcome prediction 
errors ς encode beliefs about the value of each policy (i.e., higher outcome prediction errors for a given policy roughly correspond to lower probabilities of observing 
preferred outcomes under that policy, as well as less informative observations expected under that policy). Further below are expressions for marginal free energy F 
and expected free energy G , expressed in terms of the above-mentioned (state and outcome) prediction errors. Also shown are the update equations for states, 
policies, Bayesian model averages for states weighted by policies ( s
( i )
τ
), and the depolarisation variable ( v ), as well as selection of actions ( u
( i )
t
). Subscripts denote 
dependence on policies ( π ) and time ( τ ). Superscripts ( i ) denote hierarchical level. The right panel provides a schematic of message passing between cell populations 
that could potentially implement these updates. Red units encode Bayesian model averages, cyan units encode expectations over hidden states, and pink units encode 
state and outcome prediction errors. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.) 
Fig. 3. Depiction of the simulated task. In the report condition, the agent was presented with a Gabor patch, followed by a delay and then a subsequent report phase. 
In the no-report condition, the Gabor patch was presented in identical fashion, but the agent did not anticipate the need to report its experience and therefore did not 
maintain the percept in working memory. 
C.J. Whyte et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
Current Research in Neurobiology 3 (2022) 100036
5
Gabor patch or perform a two-alternative forced-choice task. In the no- 
report condition, the agent had no task demands and was only required 
to passively perceive the stimulus (see Fig. 3 ). Inspired by the no-report 
paradigm used by Cohen and colleagues ( Cohen et al., 2020 ), we pre -
sented the Gabor patch at two different thresholds – one well above the 
threshold for report and the other well below the threshold for report 
(more on this below) – with the aim of simulating the electrophysio -
logical correlates of conscious access with and without the cognitive 
demands of subjective reports. 
To simulate the task, we constructed a generative model consisting of 
the essential features of the paradigm specified in terms of the A , B , and 
C matrices, and D vectors described above. To capture the hierarchical 
relationship between visual cortices and frontoparietal regions, we 
implemented a two-level deep temporal model ( Friston et al., 2017 ). To 
generate the relevant behaviour and simulate neuronal dynamics, we 
inverted the model using the standard marginal message passing scheme 
used in active inference ( Parr et al., 2019 ). Here we provide a verbal 
description of the generative model which should be sufficient for 
conceptual understanding of the simulations. For readers seeking to 
reproduce the simulations, the matrix form of the generative model is 
described in full in the Supplementary materials . 
The first level of the model contained two hidden state factors: “ vi -
sual stimulus ” (three possible states: “ blank screen ” , “ left-oriented 
Gabor patch ” , “ right-oriented Gabor patch ” ) and “ attention allocation ” 
(two possible states: “ high sensory precision ” , “ low sensory precision ” ); 
see Fig. 4 . Factors at this first level were intended to correspond (in a 
minimal sense) to sensory processing within the visual system and sa -
liency maps within posterior parietal cortex, respectively. 
The second, temporally deep level of the model had four hidden state 
factors: “ stimulus sequence ” (three states: “ left Gabor sequence ” , “ right 
Gabor sequence ” , “ blank sequence ” ), “ task phase ” (six states: “ 1 ” … 
“ 6 ” ), working memory goal (three states: “ null ” , “ don ’ t maintain ” , 
“ maintain ” ), and report (three states: “ null ” , “ not seen ” , “ seen ” ). Factors 
at this level were, broadly speaking, intended to correspond (in a min -
imal sense) to the frontoparietal or “ executive control ” network 
( Thomas Yeo et al., 2011 ), where each state factor might be thought of 
as a distinct network hub. 
In our previous model ( Whyte and Smith, 2021 ), perceptual contents 
were automatically gated into the temporally deep “ working memory ” 
level (independent of policies). Agents then selected subjective report 
polices based on the information encoded in working memory. In 
contrast, we here modelled working memory maintenance as itself being 
a type of policy selection (i.e., in addition to verbal report policies). This 
was motivated by previous work casting working memory gating as a 
kind of ‘cognitive action ’ ( Limanowski and Friston, 2018 ), implemented 
in parallel loops connecting PFC regions with the basal ganglia ( Hazy 
et al., 2007 ; O ’ Reilly and Frank, 2006 ). The idea here was to cast report 
and no-report conditions in terms of the incentives motivating the se -
lection of working memory policies – based on a prior body of literature 
showing that the allocation of working memory resources is a motivated 
process that depends upon task incentives ( Westbrook and Braver, 
2016 ). To do so, we modelled report vs no-report conditions by first 
giving our agents a (slight) preference to avoid the mental effort 
(cognitive demands) associated with maintaining items in working 
memory. This aversion was overcome in the report condition by giving 
the agent the additional (greater) preference for giving correct reports, 
while this preference was removed in the no-report condition. Thus, the 
goals of the agent governing policy selection were determined by the 
task instructions provided in each condition (i.e., by adding vs. 
removing the preference to report correctly in the respective 
conditions). 
To model the neural and functional effects of working memory 
gating, available choices (policies) regarding what to maintain and 
report controlled both 1) the precision of the second-level A matrix that 
mapped first-level “ stimulus states ” to the second level of the model (i.e., 
corresponding to the gating of information from visual cortex into 
working memory), and 2) the precision of the second-level B matrix 
(corresponding to the voluntary maintenance of items in working 
memory). A high precision in the second-level A matrix entailed a strong 
influence of first-level states on second-level states. A high precision in 
the second-level B matrix entailed that working memory states remained 
stable over time (i.e., states only transitioned to themselves with high 
probability). We manipulated the precision of the A and B matrices by 
passing them through a softmax function equipped with precision pa -
rameters ζ and ω , respectively (i.e., inverse temperature parameters). 
Under a trial where the agent expected to report its experience, the 
Fig. 4. Depiction of generative model structure. The 
first level of the model had two state factors corre -
sponding to 1) the stimulus, and 2) working memory 
(WM)-dependent attentional states. The second level 
of the model had four hidden state factors, corre -
sponding to 1) the stimulus sequence (e.g., that the 
stimulus appeared and then disappeared), 2) task 
phase, 3) the goal to maintain the stimulus in working 
memory, and 4) the choice of what to report. The 
second-level goal states (which governed whether to 
maintain or not maintain a stimulus in working 
memory) modulated attentional states at the first 
level. Namely, attention to external stimuli (i.e., the 
precision of the first-level state-outcome mapping) 
was attenuated when the agent maintained items in 
working memory, as a means of preventing interfer -
ence from further sensory input. First-level stimulus 
states thus continued to represent items in working 
memory (i.e., after stimulus removal) due to top- 
down influence from the second level.   
C.J. Whyte et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
Current Research in Neurobiology 3 (2022) 100036
6
associated report policies (where either ‘seen ’ or ‘unseen ’ could be re -
ported at the end of a trial) first caused the second-level A matrix 
mapping to become relatively precise ( ζ = 1 vs. ζ = 0 . 5), implementing 
a form of goal-directed attention that lead to rapid belief updating at the 
second (working memory) level of the model upon stimulus presenta -
tion. These policies also increased the precision of the second-level B 
matrix ( ω = 1 . 5 vs. ω = 0 . 5) such that working memory states remained 
stable over time after the stimulus had been encoded (for similar pre -
vious approaches to modelling working memory using active inference, 
see Parr and Friston, 2017 ; Smith et al., 2019 ). Finally, these policies 
down-weighted the sensory signal at the first-level of the model during 
the delay period of the task (i.e., reduced the precision of the first-level A 
matrix, by setting appropriate priors on first-level attentional states). 
Specifically, the “ working memory goal ” hidden state factor mapped to 
the first-level “ attention allocation ” state factor, which modulated the 
precision of the first-level A matrix (i.e., the first-level A matrix had 
different precisions under different “ attention allocation ” states). This 
had the effect that when the model was in a “ maintain ” state at the 
second level, first-level A matrix precision was lowered (for more details 
on these precision values, see Supplementary materials ). This mini -
mized any possible interference that could be caused by new sensory 
stimuli conflicting with the contents of working memory, and had the 
effect that first-level perceptual states continued to mirror the contents 
of second-level working-memory states (consistent with empirical 
studies showing maintained visual cortex activation during working 
memory maintenance ( Albers et al., 2013 ; Serences et al., 2009 )). 
In contrast, when the agent did not expect to report its experience, 
the associated no-report policy caused the second-level A matrix map -
ping to become relatively imprecise ( ζ = 0 . 5 ) , implementing a form of 
passive/diffuse attention that led to slower and less confident belief- 
updating at the second level of the model upon stimulus presentation. 
The no-report policy simultaneously reduced the precision of the 
second-level B matrix ( ω = 0 . 5 ) , such that beliefs quickly decayed away 
over the delay period (i.e., no working memory maintenance). First- 
level sensory signals were not down-weighted under this policy (i.e., 
attention at the first level remained in the default, high-precision state), 
as there was no potential for interference with working memory 
demands. 
The policy space was thus composed of three distinct policies – “ no 
report ” , “ report unseen ” , and “ report seen ” – each corresponding to a 
sequence of controllable state transitions in both the second-level 
“ working memory goal ” and “ report ” state factors. Under the “ no 
report ” policy, the “ working memory goal ” factor transitioned into the 
“ don ’ t maintain ” state and stayed there (i.e., corresponding to imprecise 
transitions and thus decay of working memory contents), and the 
“ report ” state factor stayed in the “ null ” state throughout the trial. Under 
the “ report unseen ” policy, the “ working memory goal ” factor transi -
tioned into the “ maintain ” state and stayed there (i.e., corresponding to 
a precise transition mapping from states back to themselves, and thus 
maintenance of working memory contents), and the “ report ” state factor 
transitioned from the “ null ” state to the “ report unseen ” state when the 
agent was asked to give a report at the end of the trial. The “ report seen ” 
policy was identical to the “ report unseen ” policy, except that the agent 
transitioned from the “ null ” state to the “ report seen ” state when asked 
to give a report at the last time step. 
To model forced-choice behaviour, the agent was instead asked to 
report whether the stimulus was oriented to the left or to the right. For 
these simulations, the state-observation mapping was altered such that 
the agent would only observe feedback that it was correct when the 
reported orientation matched the true orientation. This contrasts with 
the self-report simulations described above, in which the agent was 
asked to state whether or not the stimulus was seen (i.e., where the 
mapping from states to observations entailed that reporting “ seen ” was 
correct whenever the stimulus was present, independent of whether it 
was oriented to the left or to the right). 
In summary, the second level of the model allowed generation of 
reports based on combining information about task phase, goals, and 
stimulus sequence, with the aim of capturing the hypothesized role of 
PFC in conscious access. Although the hidden state factors representing 
this information are specified in abstract mathematical terms, we 
believe that three key features of this computational architecture licence 
the broad strokes anatomical conclusions we wish to draw. First, the 
lower level of the model tracks moment-to-moment changes in the 
stimulus, whereas the higher level tracks the sequence of states at the 
lower level and so necessarily evolves at a slower timescale. This sepa -
ration of timescales between the lower and higher levels of the model 
mirrors empirical findings showing that prefrontal areas have a slower 
intrinsic timescale than sensory regions (Murray et al., 2014; Wolff et al., 
2022 ). Second, the higher level of the model simulates multiple neural 
response patterns observed in PFC (see results below). This includes 
neural activity associated with goal states, task phase, and maintenance 
over the delay period, the stability of which is modulated by the preci -
sion of the transition probabilities at the higher level (see Kapoor et al., 
2018 for evidence that distinct neural populations in PFC encode in -
formation about task phase and conscious content). In previous work, 
this feature of active inference has been used to model the relationship 
between delay period activity and recurrent glutamatergic connections 
in layer III of PFC ( Parr et al., 2020 ). Third, similar to other cognitive 
models of working memory (e.g. Manohar et al., 2019 ), the maintenance 
of stimulus-related activity at the lower “ sensory ” level of the model 
relies on activity being fed back from the higher “ working memory ” 
level, where the magnitude of the feedback depends on the strength of 
higher-level delay period activity. 
3. Results 
3.1. Conscious access with and without report 
For both the report and no-report conditions, we first simulated 
curves that related report frequencies, and forced-choice performance, 
to the posterior probability over states at the second level of the model. 
We did this by iteratively reducing the first-level A matrix precision 
using an additional parameter ς (i.e., this parameter interacted with the 
influence of the “ attentional allocation ” state to produce final precision 
values). This type of precision parameter was also included in our pre -
vious work ( Whyte and Smith, 2021 ) and can be understood to corre -
spond to stimulus strength manipulations, such as contrast or 
presentation time (see Supplementary materials for details of how this 
was implemented). We iteratively reduced precision by starting at the 
lowest value where the model still reported the stimulus 100% of the 
time ( ς = . 22 for report simulations, and ς = . 2 for forced-choice simu -
lations) and stopped when report frequency dropped to 0% ( Fig. 5 a). At 
each level of precision, we simulated 100 trials. This allowed us to study 
the hypothetical report frequencies of the model in the no report con -
dition based on the posterior confidence threshold obtained in the report 
condition. Specifically, because we had access to the posterior proba -
bility at the second level, in both the report and no-report conditions, we 
could ask, counterfactually , whether the agent would have reported 
seeing the Gabor if we had asked it to do so. 
We used this approach to address the primary aim of our simulations, 
which was to explain why the neural correlates of conscious access 
change as a function of reporting demands. As reviewed above, while 
traditional (report) paradigms in visual consciousness research have 
found strong relationships between self-reports, the P3b, and elevated 
PFC activation, when reporting demands are removed, the P3b vanishes 
entirely and PFC activity is greatly reduced. The next two sub-sections 
describe the simulated firing rates and ERPs of a set of simulations 
based on the no-report paradigm of Cohen and colleagues ( Cohen et al., 
2020 ). Analogous to the experimental procedure used in that study, we 
presented the agent with stimuli both well above report threshold ( ς =
. 5 ) , and well below report threshold ( ς = . 05 ) , in both report and 
no-report conditions, leading to four conditions; above threshold/report , 
C.J. Whyte et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
Current Research in Neurobiology 3 (2022) 100036
7
above threshold/no-report , below threshold/report , and below 
threshold/no-report. 
3.1.1. Simulated firing rates 
In studies using fMRI ( Bisenius et al., 2015 ), and more direct mea -
sures of neural activity such as intracranial EEG ( Gaillard et al., 2009 ), 
subjective reports of conscious access are associated with a large in -
crease in activity throughout the frontoparietal network (even when 
contrasted with conditions where participants still generate a report of 
not seeing a stimulus; c.f. Michel and Morales, 2020 ). However, as 
reviewed in the introduction, when reporting demands are removed 
prefrontal activity drops below the level of significance in fMRI ( Frassle 
et al., 2014 ), and it is greatly reduced in magnitude (although still 
present) when measured by more direct means ( Noy et al., 2015 ) (e.g. 
electrocortitcography, ECoG). 
The simulated firing rates of our model, in each of the four conditions 
described above, speak directly to this set of results (see Fig. 5 b). In line 
with traditional report paradigms, in the above threshold/report condi -
tion the second-level firing rates for the presented stimulus were sub -
stantially higher when the stimulus was presented above the threshold 
for report, with a posterior probability at the end of the stimulus pre -
sentation of 0.99 for the presented stimulus (a right-oriented Gabor). In 
contrast, when we removed the reporting demands – leading the pre -
cision of the messages sent from the first to the second level of the model 
to be reduced (i.e., corresponding to a reduction in the strength of 
afferent connectivity between visual cortex and frontoparietal regions) – 
the firing rates at the second level of the model during the stimulus 
presentation period were attenuated. Crucially, however, the peak 
posterior probability for the presented stimulus (again a right-oriented 
Gabor) over the presentation period was 0.88, which we know from 
our report curves ( Fig. 5 a) is at the threshold for approximately 100% 
reportability. 
Fig. 5. The left plot in the top panel (a) shows the percentage of trials across 100 simulations in which agents reported seeing a stimulus given different posterior 
probabilities over second-level states. The top-right plot illustrates how posterior beliefs were related to accuracy in an analogous set of forced-choice simulations (see 
main text). The bottom panel (b) shows the normalised firing rates (posterior probabilities) for report and no-report trials. Rows represent each possible stimulus 
percept (hidden state), columns indicate discrete time-steps (where each discrete time step consists of 16 iterations of gradient decent on variational free energy with 
respect to states), and darker colours indicate higher firing rates (higher probabilities). These results illustrate that, even though second-level firing rates (encoding 
posteriors over stimulus sequence states) in the no-report condition are lower than in the report condition, these firing rates (and associated posterior probabilities) 
are still above the threshold for (close to 100%) successful reporting in the report condition (indicated by the red arrow; posterior probability = .88). Thus, despite 
observed reductions in PFC activation in no-report studies (as is also the case in these simulations), this suggests that such findings need not indicate a lack of 
prefrontal involvement when stimuli are seen. That is, the simulated prefrontal firing rates (and associated posterior probabilities) in the no-report condition are still 
sufficiently high at stimulus presentation that the agent – based on behaviour in the reporting condition – would still have been successful in self-reporting if asked to 
do so (i.e., consistent with a theory in which prefrontal involvement is essential to access). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the 
reader is referred to the Web version of this article.) 
C.J. Whyte et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
Current Research in Neurobiology 3 (2022) 100036
8
This shows that the reduction in PFC activity that accompanies the 
removal of reporting demands can be explained by the corresponding 
reduction in the precision of the messages being passed between sensory 
cortex and PFC. In other words, removing reporting demands reduced 
the strength of effective connectivity between sensory cortex and PFC. 
We now turn to the results of the two below-threshold conditions 
( Fig. 6 ). In the below threshold/report condition, although stimulus pre -
cision was too low to be reported as visible, it was still high enough to 
have stimulus information be propagated to the second level of the 
model during the stimulus presentation period. After the stimulus was 
removed, the model assigned most of the probability mass to the “ blank ” 
stimulus state (as it was confident in not having seen the stimulus). 
Importantly, however, as can be seen in the firing rates ( Fig. 6 ), there 
was still a greater posterior probability assigned to the presented stim -
ulus state (right Gabor) than the other possible stimulus state (left 
Gabor). So when the model was given a forced choice between the left 
and right orientation, its performance was still slightly above chance 
52% (to see this, compare the second-level posterior probability for the 
presented stimulus shown in Fig. 6 to the report curves in Fig. 5 ). Finally, 
in the below threshold/no-report condition, the model was well below the 
posterior confidence threshold for both report and forced-choice 
performance. 
Although the primary explanatory target of our model was the 
change in the neural correlates of consciousness as a function of 
reporting demands, it is worth highlighting that the results in this sec -
tion are also very much in line with the results of King and colleagues 
( King et al., 2016 ), who used an unconscious working memory paradigm 
very similar to the task performed by our simulated agent. Specifically, 
they found that they could decode the presence and orientation of the 
target stimulus (also a Gabor) throughout a delay period – even when 
the stimulus was reported unseen. Like our simulated agent, they found 
that participants ’ reports of visibility correlated with forced-choice 
performance. Crucially, and also like our simulated agent, even when 
the participants reported the stimulus as invisible, they still performed 
marginally above chance in a forced-choice task. To see this effect in our 
results, compare the forced-choice accuracy curve to the subjective 
report curve. Below a posterior probability of .78, the model no longer 
reported the stimulus as seen, but it still performs well above chance in 
the forced-choice task. In addition, analogous to how report percentage 
is tied to the second-level firing rate in our model (i.e., to second-level 
posterior probability), King and colleagues found that decoding accu -
racy during the delay period correlated with participants ’ visibility 
ratings, suggesting a common neural substrate for report and mainte -
nance. That is, if maintenance and visibility relied on independent 
substrates, then decoding should have been identical across visibility 
levels, but this is not what was found. This therefore provides additional 
face validity to our model structure, as simulated neural activity in the 
second level of our model would show a similar pattern of decodability 
in trials where the stimulus is not reported as seen. 
3.1.2. Simulated event related potentials 
In the previous sub-section, we saw how, with a relatively simple 
model, we can account for the results of both no-report paradigms and a 
prominent study on unconscious working memory. In this sub-section, 
we examine the ERPs produced by our model in each of the four con -
ditions described above, and relate them to previous empirical findings 
in the literature. We will first review some of these empirical findings in 
more detail to motivate the importance of the questions we address. 
When conscious access is measured via trial-by-trial subjective 
report, the amplitude of the P3b, a relatively late frontocentral ERP, 
correlates tightly with stimulus visibility. At one point, GNW theorists 
considered the P3b to be a signature of sensory contents becoming 
conscious. The idea was that when perceptual contents gain access to the 
frontoparietal network identified with the global workspace, only a 
fraction of the inputs are depolarised, while the majority of competing 
inputs are inhibited. This response pattern was argued to explain the 
frontocentral positivity that characterises the P3b ( Dehaene, 2014 ). 
However, this result has come under increasing scrutiny, leading to the 
now accepted view that the P3b reflects the task demands associated 
with reports of conscious access, and not conscious access itself ( Cohen 
et al., 2020 ; F ¨orster et al., 2020 ; Sergent et al., 2021 ). The first experi -
ment to convincingly dissociate conscious access and the P3b was con -
ducted by Pitts and colleagues ( Pitts et al., 2014 ), who, as described in 
the introduction, used a no-report variant of an inattentional blindness 
Fig. 6. First- and second-level firing rates when stimuli were presented below visibility threshold in report (left) and no-report (right) conditions. As can be seen, 
second-level posteriors were higher in the report condition, and still slightly favoured the correct stimulus over the incorrect stimulus at the report phase – providing 
a basis for above-chance forced-choice performance. Recall that darker shades in these plots indicate higher firing rates and that each row corresponds to a possible 
hidden (perceptual) state. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.) 
C.J. Whyte et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
Current Research in Neurobiology 3 (2022) 100036
9
paradigm that collected reports after each block instead of trial-by-trail. 
They found that the amplitude of the P3b correlated with task relevance, 
not awareness. Yet, because reports were collected block-by-block, and 
attention was at best only diffusely present until the stimulus was made 
task relevant, the results are open to the objection that participants may 
have missed the occurrence of the critical stimulus on a substantial 
number of trials, explaining the lack of P3b. This objection was 
addressed by a study conducted by Cohen and colleagues ( Cohen et al., 
2020 ), whose paradigm inspired the task performed here by our simu -
lated agent. They found that the results of Pitts and colleagues ( Pitts 
et al., 2014 ) generalised to a standard masking paradigm. Specifically, 
they presented the stimulus well above the threshold for visibility, and 
well below the threshold for visibility, under both report and no-report 
conditions. Crucially, in the no-report condition they had participants 
perform an incidental memory task, which they performed with a high 
degree of accuracy, but only for stimuli presented above the threshold 
for visibility – thereby reducing the plausibility of the objection that the 
unmasked stimuli may not have been experienced on no-report blocks. 
Just like Pitts and colleagues ( Pitts et al., 2014 ), Cohen and colleagues 
( Cohen et al., 2020 ) found that the P3b correlated with reporting de -
mands, but not conscious access (i.e., as with our results in Fig. 7 below). 
Unlike the results of Pitts and colleagues ( Pitts et al., 2014 ), the absence 
of the P3b in the no-report condition cannot be parsimoniously 
explained by a diffuse allocation of attention, since the participants were 
not performing a separate attention-demanding task like they were in 
the Pitts and colleagues ( Pitts et al., 2014 ) study. With respect to the 
series of results just reviewed, the purpose of the model presented in this 
paper was therefore to see if the working memory gating hypothesis, 
Fig. 7. This figure illustrates how the cognitive demands of reporting generate rapidly increasing firing rates at the second level of the model – and the resultantly 
large P3b-like ERPs in the report condition (i.e., based on the neural process theory associated with active inference, in which ERPs reflect rates of change in posterior 
beliefs over states and associated firing rates). In contrast, rates of change in firing rates are lower in the no-report condition – leading to the absence of P3b-like ERPs. 
This reproduces and offers an explanation for the results of Cohen and colleagues ( Cohen et al., 2020 ). Thus, despite the persistence of PFC activity (associated with 
conscious access) in the simulations in Fig. 5 , these latter results simultaneously account for the dissociation between the P3b and conscious access. We remind the 
reader that darker shades in these plots indicate higher firing rates, time-in-trial progresses from left to right, and each row corresponds to a possible hidden 
(perceptual) state. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.) 
C.J. Whyte et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
Current Research in Neurobiology 3 (2022) 100036
10
which could parsimoniously explain the univariate fMRI and ECoG 
no-report results described above, might also be capable of explaining 
the lack of the P3b in a standard masking paradigm once reporting de -
mands are removed. 
Despite the simplicity of our model, the simulated ERPs in each 
condition display a striking similarity to the results of Cohen and col -
leagues ( Cohen et al., 2020 ). Fig. 7 shows the simulated ERPs for each of 
the four conditions alongside the empirical results. Specifically, we 
plotted the temporal derivative of the normalised firing rate (posterior 
over states at each epoch of gradient decent; see Appendix 1 ) described 
above – the proposed basis of ERPs under the active inference process 
theory – with respect to states at the second level of the model for each of 
the four conditions ( above threshold/report , below threshold/report , above 
threshold/no-report , and below threshold/no-report ). Reproducing the 
empirical results, our simulations show that a P3b-like ERP is present in 
the report condition but vanishes in the absence of reporting demands. 
Crucially, we know from our previous examination of the second-level 
posterior beliefs that the model is still above the threshold for near 
100% visibility in both the report and no-report conditions. Inspection 
of the firing rates associated with the report and no-report conditions 
(bottom panel of Fig. 7 ) makes the reason for the difference in ERPs 
apparent. In the report condition, the messages passed between the first 
and second level of the model are precise and lead to a rapid rate of 
belief updating at the second level of the model (i.e., corresponding to a 
large rate of change in the posterior over states), generating an ERP 
resembling the P3b. In contrast, in the no-report condition the precision 
of the messages passed between levels was greatly reduced, leading 
second-level posterior beliefs to update in a more gradual manner and 
therefore generating a (substantially) smaller ERP. Importantly, this 
interpretation of the no-report results suggested by our model leads to a 
strong empirical prediction. Namely, if a dynamic causal model (DCM; 
Friston et al., 2003 ; Kiebel et al., 2008 ) with nodes for visual and lateral 
frontal cortices were fitted to EEG data from this or a similar no-report 
paradigm ( Cohen et al., 2020 ; Sergent et al., 2021 ), we should see a 
modulation of bidirectional connectivity as a function of reporting de -
mands. Specifically, the strength of bidirectional connectivity between 
frontal and visual cortices should be reduced in the absence of report. 
4. Discussion 
The debate between cognitive theorists ( Brown et al., 2019 ; Dehaene 
and Changeux, 2011 ; Mashour et al., 2020 ) and perceptual theorists 
( Lamme, 2006 ; Oizumi et al., 2014 ) about the involvement of prefrontal 
cortex in consciousness predates the introduction of no-report para -
digms. But with the experimental contrast between conscious and un -
conscious conditions depending, until recently, on the collection of 
subjective reports, evidence from both neuroimaging and invasive 
electrophysiology in non-human primates primarily supported cognitive 
theories ( Bisenius et al., 2015 ; Panagiotaropoulos et al., 2012 ). With the 
introduction of no-report methods ( Tsuchiya et al., 2015 ), however, 
much of this evidence came under scrutiny and new results seemed to 
confirm the central arguments of perceptual theorists – namely, that 
consciousness is, at bottom, a perceptual phenomenon, that PFC (at 
most) modulates conscious access, and that its activation in neuro -
imaging studies is a result of the cognitive demands of report generation 
( Boly et al., 2017 ; Tsuchiya et al., 2015 ). As reviewed in the introduc -
tion, the evidential pendulum has now begun to swing back in the other 
direction. Namely, when no-report paradigms have been used in 
conjunction with invasive recordings and more sophisticated analytic 
techniques, supporting evidence for cognitive theories has emerged 
( Dwarakanath et al., 2020 ; Kapoor et al., 2020 ; Sergent et al., 2021 ). 
This recent body of work led to the question that we set out to answer in 
this paper. Namely, given the now compelling evidence for the 
involvement of PFC in consciousness, what is the difference in cognitive 
processing that explains why the neural correlates of consciousness 
change as a function of reporting demands? 
Here we advanced a model of conscious access that casts the 
engagement of cognitive resources associated with reporting as a variety 
of ‘cognitive action ’ – here corresponding to goal-directed adjustments 
in the effective connectivity within and between frontal and visual 
cortices ( Limanowski and Friston, 2018 ). Under our model, conscious 
access is simply a matter of having a high enough posterior probability 
over states at a temporally deep level of representation. This allows an 
agent to have access to its own first-level perceptual representations 
such that it could report them – and counterfactually so in no-report 
conditions. That is, simulated PFC activity crosses the threshold for 
reportability at stimulus presentation in no-report tasks, despite 
remaining lower than in report tasks. Building on our previous work 
( Hohwy, 2013 ; Smith, 2016 , 2017 ; Whyte, 2019 ; Whyte and Smith, 
2021 ), we propose that conscious access occurs when sensory states 
have a high enough precision that inferences about these states at 
temporally deep levels of the cortical hierarchy pass the posterior 
probability threshold for reporting (i.e., where reporting here stands in 
for other goal-directed uses of information enabled by temporally deep 
processing). The content of our moment-to-moment experience is 
therefore not encoded at temporally deep prefrontal levels of the model 
(i.e., whose content here corresponds to longer-timescale perceptual 
sequences). Rather it is the process of first-level perceptual representa -
tions being integrated into a temporally deep representation that makes 
their contents conscious. In other words, perceptual experience corre -
sponds to the moment-to-moment updates to the deeper prefrontal level, 
based on the impact of the messages passed up to prefrontal regions from 
sensory cortices. 
Crucially, if reporting requires a type of ‘cognitive action ’ in which 
sensory content is gated into, and maintained in, working memory, then 
this carries important functional implications. Specifically, it follows 
that imposing reporting demands will require an agent to effect goal- 
directed increases in the precision of the messages being passed be -
tween sensory and prefrontal cortices (as well as within prefrontal 
cortices) – thereby altering the neural correlates of conscious access. If 
the precision of these messages instead remains low in no-report con -
ditions, and the rate/magnitude of belief updates in prefrontal cortex is 
therefore reduced, then this can account for the reduced prefrontal ac -
tivity and smaller P3b ERPs seen empirically ( Cohen et al., 2020 ; Pitts 
et al., 2014 ). Conversely, when agents are required to report their 
experience, the resulting increase in the precision of messages passed 
between sensory and prefrontal cortices will increase the rate of belief 
updating, resulting in increased PFC activity and a large P3b. Indeed, 
this is exactly what was observed in a recent simultaneous EEG-fMRI 
experiment ( Dellert et al., 2021 ), which had participants perform a 
modified version of the Pitts and colleagues ( Pitts et al., 2014 ) inat -
tentional blindness task. When the stimulus was conscious, but not task 
relevant, there was strong activation of visual regions, and a large N170, 
but only weak prefrontal activation and no P3b. In contrast, when the 
stimulus was conscious, and task relevant, there was strong prefrontal 
activation, and a large P3b ( Dellert et al., 2021 ). 
A direct prediction of our account is that the frequency of perceptual 
transitions in binocular rivalry, which are known to be slowed in the 
absence of attention ( Paffen et al., 2006 ), should likewise be slowed in 
the absence of reporting demands. That is, under our model, and the 
active inference process theory on which it is based, both attention and 
working memory gating modulate the precision of afferent sensory in -
formation sent from lower to higher levels of processing. We would 
predict, therefore, that reduced working memory demands, like the 
absence of attention, should slow the speed of transitions in rivalry. This 
is indeed what was found by Fr ¨assle and colleagues ( Frassle et al., 2014 ), 
who reported that in the passive (i.e., no-report) condition of their 
binocular rivalry paradigm, perceptual transitions (when measured by 
changes in pupil size) were slower than in the report condition. 
Throughout this paper we have referred to a “ cognitive theory ” as 
any theory which posits that PFC plays a necessary functional role in 
determining the contents of consciousness. There are of course 
C.J. Whyte et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
Current Research in Neurobiology 3 (2022) 100036
11
important differences between cognitive theories. Most prominently, 
higher order theory (HOT) proposes that PFC houses a mechanism for 
higher-order representations, where lower-order representations 
become conscious when they are, in some way, the target of such higher- 
order representations ( Brown et al., 2019 ). In contrast, global neuronal 
workspace (GNW) theory posits that PFC, among a network of other 
structures, is part of a “ global workspace ” that houses the contents of 
consciousness. On this view, contents become conscious when the 
workspace is “ ignited ” , corresponding to selectively increased effective 
connectivity between regions allowing the GNW network to gain access 
to locally represented information (i.e., that would otherwise only be 
represented unconsciously). The signature of this ignition process is a 
non-linear bifurcation-like phenomenon that can be detected in neural 
activity ( Joglekar et al., 2017 ; Mashour et al., 2020 ; Sergent et al., 
2021 ). This of course raises the question of whether the model and 
simulations presented in this paper provide support for HOT or the 
GNW. Reminiscent of HOT, conscious access in our model depends on a 
second (higher) level that represents information about the sensory 
contents at the first level. However, this is not a simple 
re-representation. Instead, the second level infers the sequential 
unfolding of states at the first level, and it is the temporal depth of the 
second level – not the fact that it re-represents information about the 
first level – that allows the model to generate reports. We therefore see 
our model as more closely aligned with the GNW. Indeed, we have 
previously proposed ( Hohwy, 2013 ; Whyte, 2019 ), and later shown 
through simulation ( Whyte and Smith, 2021 ), that many of the classic 
behavioural and neural results cited in support of GNW theory 
(including ignition dynamics) arise naturally in a two-level active 
inference model of conscious access/report generation. Also reminiscent 
of the GNW, our model requires several independent state factors at the 
higher level that must jointly gain access to first-level contents. These 
different state factors could be seen as different hubs in a GNW-like 
network, only some of which engage in the above-mentioned form of 
re-representation. Thus, our model can be seen as capturing and inte -
grating aspects of HOT, GNW theory, and predictive processing – 
highlighting similarities that may not otherwise be apparent. 
We follow Hohwy and Seth ( Hohwy and Seth, 2020 ; Seth and 
Hohwy, 2021 ; also see Vilas et al., 2021 ) in interpreting the present 
active inference model as a theory for consciousness science rather than 
a theory of consciousness. That is, instead of constructing a theory of 
consciousness per se , our approach appeals to active inference as a 
general theory of brain function that can be used to construct generative 
models of representative experimental tasks in consciousness research. 
This approach allowed us to show in simulations how inferential dy -
namics in the model naturally reproduce and provide mechanistic ex -
planations for the neurophysiological signatures known to accompany 
conscious access. Since the model was based on the structure of an 
empirical task, and did not assume a specific cognitive theory, we 
interpret our results as supporting any cognitive theory that embraces 
working-memory gating as a necessary component in the mechanism(s) 
of report generation. 
To conclude, we have presented a computational model that dem -
onstrates how results in no-report paradigms need not pose a problem 
for cognitive theories of consciousness. In fact, the results of these par -
adigms emerge naturally when the engagement of cognitive resources 
needed for reporting is modelled as a variety of cognitive action under 
temporally deep active inference. In this model, which is consistent with 
cognitive theories, one can reproduce and explain available empirical 
results while also demonstrating how prefrontal engagement remains 
necessary and associated with conscious contents. It is important to 
acknowledge that this model and associated simulations are vastly 
oversimplified, and future work will need to both extend the scope of 
these simulations and test their empirical predictions. This notwith -
standing, the general computational architecture and dynamics of the 
model and simulation results we have shown appear to provide impor -
tant and potentially generalizable insights about the way current results 
can be explained in a unifying and theoretically informative manner. 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Christopher J. Whyte: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Writing 
– original draft, Writing – review & editing. Jakob Hohwy: Writing – 
review & editing. Ryan Smith: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, 
Writing – review & editing. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Acknowledgments 
The authors thank Shay Tobin, Catriona Scrivener, and the audience 
at the Meta Lab ’ s Consciousness Club seminar series for discussion and 
feedback on the topic of this manuscript. C.W. is supported by the 
University of Cambridge Harding Distinguished Postgraduate Scholars 
Programme. J. H. is supported by the Australian Research Council 
DP160102770 and the Three Springs Foundation. R.S. is funded by the 
William K. Warren Foundation and the National Institute of General 
Medical Sciences (P20GM121312).  
Appendix 1. Objective functions and update equations 
Here the generative model is a partially observable Markov decision process allowing the joint distribution to be factorised into the product of a 
prior over the initial state p ( s
1
) , prior over policies p ( π ) , likelihood p ( o
τ
| s
τ
) , and transition probability p ( s
τ
| s
τ   1
, π ) . 
p ( o
1 : T
, s
1 : T
, π )= p ( s
1
) p ( π )
∏
T
τ = 1
p ( o
τ
| s
τ
)
∏
T
τ = 2
p ( s
τ
| s
τ   1
, π ) (A.1)  
p ( o
1 : T
, s
1 : T
| π ) = p ( s
1
)
∏
T
τ = 1
p ( o
τ
| s
τ
)
∏
T
τ = 2
p ( s
τ
| s
τ   1
, π ) (L2)  
= s
1
⋅ D
∏
T
τ = 1
o
τ
⋅ A s
τ
∏
T
τ = 2
s
τ
⋅ B
π , τ
s
τ   1
(L3) 
The second line of A.1 conditions the generative model on π as inference is performed under each available policy. Line three then shows the matrix 
form of the generative model conditioned on π , replacing each categorical distribution with matrices whose columns contain the parameters of the 
distributions. That is, p ( s
1
) = s
1
⋅ D , p ( o
τ
| s
τ
) = o
τ
⋅ A s
τ
, and p ( s
τ
| s
τ   1
, π ) = s
τ
⋅ B
π , τ
s
τ   1
. Where o
τ 
and s
τ   1 
are vectors of zeros with a one placed in the 
element corresponding to the state or observation of interest. These vectors select the relevant element of the A and B matrices corresponding to a 
C.J. Whyte et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
Current Research in Neurobiology 3 (2022) 100036
12
specific state-outcome pair or current state-previous state pair. 
To perform state estimation under this generative model in a tractable manner we need to introduce an objective function which can be optimised 
via gradient decent. Here we use marginal free energy which is defined as follows: 
F
π , τ
= s
π , τ
⋅
(
ln s
π , τ
 
1
2
(
ln B
π , τ   1
s
π , τ   1
+ ln B
†
π , τ
s
π , τ + 1
)
  ln A
T
o
τ
)
(A.2)  
Here, B
†
π , τ 
denotes the transpose of B
π , τ 
with normalised columns, and when τ = 1, B
π , τ   1
s
π , τ   1 
is replaced by D . For the derivation and motivation 
behind marginal free energy, see Parr et al. (2019). 
With marginal free energy serving as our objective function, we take the gradient of marginal free energy with respect to states for each of its 
arguments to obtain the following: 
∇
s π , τ
F
π
= ln s
π , τ
+ 1
↼
 
1
2
(
ln B
π , τ   1
s
π , τ   1
+ ln B
†
π , τ
s
π , τ + 1
)
  ln A
T
o
τ
(A.3)  
  ∇
s π , τ
F
π
=
1
2
(
ln B
π , τ   1
s
π , τ   1
+ ln B
†
π , τ
s
π , τ + 1
)
+ ln A
T
o
τ
  ln s
π , τ
(L.2) 
Line two multiplies both sides by negative one and drops the vector of ones as it is constant across elements of the gradient. It is this negative 
(marginal) free energy gradient that we define as state prediction error   ∇
s π , τ
F
π
= ε
π , τ
. This makes conceptual sense. The negative free energy 
gradient is the (log) difference between the generative model after having received an observation and our approximate posterior over states. 
Finally, we define a new ‘depolarisation ’ variable v
π , τ
= ln s
π , τ
, which represents the membrane potential/voltage of the neuronal population 
encoding the posterior over states. Using our state prediction error and membrane potential variables we then write down a set of equations that 
perform a gradient decent on marginal free energy with respect to states under each policy and can be iterated until convergence. 
v
π , τ
← ln s
π , τ
(A.4)  
ε
π , τ
←
1
2
(
ln B
π , τ   1
s
π , τ   1
+ ln B
†
π , τ
s
π , τ + 1
)
+ ln A
T
o
τ
  v
π , τ
(L.2)  
v
π , τ
← v
π , τ
+ ε
π , τ
(L.3)  
s
π , τ
← σ
 
v
π , τ
)
(L.4) 
Line one of equation A.4 initialises the depolarisation variable as the log of the approximate posterior over states. Line two calculates the value of 
the negative free energy gradient which is then used to update the depolarisation variable ( v
π , τ
) in the direction of steepest decent in line three. Finally, 
in line four, the depolarisation variable is normalised to give an updated value for the approximate posterior over states. 
The gradient decent on marginal free energy serves a dual purpose: 1) it optimises the approximate posterior distribution over states such that it 
approximates the true posterior over states, and 2) it furnishes us with a model of neuronal dynamics that, as we highlighted in the main text, has a 
degree of face validity. Namely, because the membrane potential (log posterior over states) is not normalised it can take both positive and negative 
values like voltage, and after the depolarisation variable is transformed into an approximate posterior by passing it through a softmax function, it has a 
value that is bounded between zero and one, like a normalised firing rate. 
Turning now to action selection. We would like our agent to select actions that will minimize marginal free energy in the future. This is, however, 
not straightforwardly possible since marginal free energy depends upon observations that by definition have not yet occurred. The solution to this 
problem is to introduce a new quantity, expected free energy (denoted G
π
), which, unlike marginal free energy, treats observations as random var -
iables that enter into the expectation operator. 
G
π
= Е
q ( o , s | π )
[ ln q ( s | π )   ln p ( o , s | π )] (A.5)  
≈ D
KL
( q ( o | π )|| p ( o | C )) + E
q ( s | π )
[ H [ p ( o | s )]] (L2)  
=
∑
τ
 
A s
π , τ
⋅
 
ln A s
π , τ
  ln C
τ
)
  diag
 
A
T
ln A
)
⋅ s
π , τ
)
(L3) 
Equation (A.5) starts with the definition of expected free energy for a generic generative model. Line two shows the standard decomposition of 
expected free energy into risk plus ambiguity. Risk is the KL divergence between the observations expected under a policy and the preference dis -
tribution D
KL
( q ( o | π )|| p ( o | C )) , where C encodes the agent ’ s preferences over observations. To minimize risk, agents must select policies expected to 
generate the observations that are most preferred. Ambiguity is the expected entropy of the likelihood. To minimize ambiguity, agent ’ s must select 
policies that minimize the entropy of the likelihood E
q ( s | π )
[ H [ p ( o | s )]] . That is, they must select actions that minimize the uncertainty of the mapping 
between states and observations. To minimize expected free energy as a whole, agents balance between minimizing risk and minimizing ambiguity, 
solving the exploration-exploitation dilemma. Finally, line 3 shows the matrix form of the risk + ambiguity decomposition, replacing the distributions 
with matrices/vectors whose columns contain the elements of the distributions. For a step-by-step derivation of this decomposition, see the appendix 
of Smith et al. (2022) . 
The posterior over policies is then a softmax function of both the expected free energy under each policy, and the marginal free energy under each 
policy. 
q ( π ) = σ (   F   G ) (A.6) 
Including both marginal free energy and expected free energy in the term for the posterior over policies is not always necessary. For policies that 
only look one time step ahead we only need expected free energy. We include both here because the simulations in this paper are chiefly concerned 
with the selection of deep policies that require the agent to infer the policy it is following over the entire time horizon of each trial (while in each epoch 
of the trial). The inclusion of marginal free energy means that as each trial progresses and new observations are received at each epoch, policies that 
C.J. Whyte et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
Current Research in Neurobiology 3 (2022) 100036
13
are inconsistent with present observations will become implausible. For example, when our agent holds an item in memory over the delay, first-level 
observations are generated that are inconsistent with the “ no-report ” policy, rendering it implausible. 
Supplementary materials 
Supplementary materials to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crneur.2022.100036 . 
References 
Albers, A.M., Kok, P., Toni, I., Dijkerman, H.C., de Lange, F.P., 2013. Shared 
representations for working memory and mental imagery in early visual cortex. Curr. 
Biol. 23 (15), 1427 – 1431. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2013.05.065 . 
Bisenius, S., Trapp, S., Neumann, J., Schroeter, M.L., 2015. Identifying neural correlates 
of visual consciousness with ALE meta-analyses. Neuroimage 122, 177 – 187. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.07.070 . 
Boly, M., Massimini, M., Tsychiya, N., Postle, B.R., Koch, C., Tononi, G., 2017. Are the 
neural correlates of consciousness in the front or in the back of the cerebral cortex? 
Clinical and neuroimaging evidence [Preprint]. Neuroscience. https://doi.org/ 
10.1101/118273 . 
Breakspear, M., 2017. Dynamic models of large-scale brain activity. Nat. Neurosci. 20 
(3), 340 – 352. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.4497 . 
Brown, R., Lau, H., LeDoux, J., 2019. The Misunderstood Higher-Order Approach to 
Consciousness. https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/xpy8h [Preprint]. PsyArXiv.  
Cohen, M.A., Ortego, K., Kyroudis, A., Pitts, M., 2020. Distinguishing the neural 
correlates of perceptual awareness and postperceptual processing. J. Neurosci. 40 
(25), 4925 – 4935. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0120-20.2020 . 
Da Costa, L., Parr, T., Sajid, N., Veselic, S., Neacsu, V., Friston, K., 2020. Active inference 
on discrete state-spaces: a synthesis. J. Math. Psychol. 99, 102447. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jmp.2020.102447 . 
Da Costa, L., Parr, T., Sengupta, B., Friston, K., 2021. Neural dynamics under active 
inference: plausibility and efficiency of information processing. Entropy 23 (4), 454. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/e23040454 . 
Dehaene, S., 2014. Consciousness and the Brain: Deciphering How the Brain Codes Our 
Thoughts. Penguin Publishing Group . 
Dehaene, S., Changeux, J.-P., 2011. Experimental and theoretical approaches to 
conscious processing. Neuron 70 (2), 200 – 227. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
neuron.2011.03.018 . 
Dellert, T., Müller-Bardorff, M., Schlossmacher, I., Pitts, M., Hofmann, D., 
Bruchmann, M., Straube, T., 2021. Dissociating the neural correlates of 
consciousness and task relevance in face perception using simultaneous EEG-fMRI. 
J. Neurosci. 41 (37), 7864 – 7875. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2799- 
20.2021 . 
Dwarakanath, A., Kapoor, V., Werner, J., Safavi, S., Fedorov, L.A., Logothetis, N.K., 
Panagiotaropoulos, T.I., 2020. Prefrontal state fluctuations control access to 
consciousness [Preprint]. Neuroscience. https://doi.org/10.1101/ 
2020.01.29.924928 . 
F ¨orster, J., Koivisto, M., Revonsuo, A., 2020. ERP and MEG correlates of visual 
consciousness: the second decade. Conscious. Cognit. 80, 102917. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.concog.2020.102917 . 
Frassle, S., Sommer, J., Jansen, A., Naber, M., Einhauser, W., 2014. Binocular rivalry: 
frontal activity relates to introspection and action but not to perception. J. Neurosci. 
34 (5), 1738 – 1747. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4403-13.2014 . 
Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., O Doherty, J., Pezzulo, G., 2016. 
Active inference and learning. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 68, 862 – 879. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.06.022 . 
Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., Pezzulo, G., 2017. Active 
inference: a process theory. Neural Comput. 29 (1), 1 – 49. https://doi.org/10.1162/ 
NECO_a_00912 . 
Friston, K.J., Harrison, L., Penny, W., 2003. Dynamic causal modelling. Neuroimage 19 
(4), 1273 – 1302. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1053-8119(03)00202-7 . 
Friston, K.J., Rosch, R., Parr, T., Price, C., Bowman, H., 2017. Deep temporal models and 
active inference. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 77, 388 – 402. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
neubiorev.2017.04.009 . 
Gaillard, R., Dehaene, S., Adam, C., Cl ´emenceau, S., Hasboun, D., Baulac, M., Cohen, L., 
Naccache, L., 2009. Converging intracranial markers of conscious access. PLoS Biol. 
7 (3), e1000061 https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1000061 . 
Gelbard-Sagiv, H., Mudrik, L., Hill, M.R., Koch, C., Fried, I., 2018. Human single neuron 
activity precedes emergence of conscious perception. Nat. Commun. 9 (1), 2057. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-03749-0 . 
Hazy, T.E., Frank, M.J., O ’ Reilly, R.C., 2007. Towards an executive without a 
homunculus: computational models of the prefrontal cortex/basal ganglia system. 
Phil. Trans.: Biol. Sci. 362 (1485), 1601 – 1613 . 
Hohwy, J., 2013. The Predictive Mind. Oxford University Press . 
Hohwy, J., Seth, A., 2020. Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the 
neural correlates of consciousness. Phil. Mind Sci. 1 (II) https://doi.org/10.33735/ 
phimisci.2020.II.64 . Article II.  
Joglekar, M.R., Mejias, J.F., Yang, G.R., Wang, X.-J., 2017. Inter-areal balanced 
amplification enhances signal propagation in a large-scale circuit model of the primate 
cortex [Preprint]. Neuroscience. https://doi.org/10.1101/186007 . 
Kapoor, V., Besserve, M., Logothetis, N.K., Panagiotaropoulos, T.I., 2018. Parallel and 
functionally segregated processing of task phase and conscious content in the 
prefrontal cortex. Communicat. Biol. 1 (1), 215. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003- 
018-0225-1 . 
Kapoor, V., Dwarakanath, A., Safavi, S., Werner, J., Besserve, M., Panagiotaropoulos, T. 
I., Logothetis, N.K., 2020. Decoding the contents of consciousness from prefrontal 
ensembles [Preprint]. Neuroscience. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.01.28.921841 . 
Kiebel, S.J., Garrido, M.I., Moran, R.J., Friston, K.J., 2008. Dynamic causal modelling for 
EEG and MEG. Cognitive Neurodynamics 2 (2), 121 – 136. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s11571-008-9038-0 . 
King, J.-R., Pescetelli, N., Dehaene, S., 2016. Brain mechanisms underlying the brief 
maintenance of seen and unseen sensory information. Neuron 92 (5), 1122 – 1134. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2016.10.051 . 
Lamme, V.A.F., 2006. Towards a true neural stance on consciousness. Trends Cognit. Sci. 
10 (11), 494 – 501. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2006.09.001 . 
Limanowski, J., Friston, K., 2018. ‘Seeing the dark ’ : grounding phenomenal transparency 
and opacity in precision estimation for active inference. Front. Psychol. 9, 643. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00643 . 
Manohar, S.G., Zokaei, N., Fallon, S.J., Vogels, T.P., Husain, M., 2019. Neural 
mechanisms of attending to items in working memory. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 
101, 1 – 12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.03.017 . 
Mashour, G.A., Roelfsema, P., Changeux, J.-P., Dehaene, S., 2020. Conscious processing 
and the global neuronal workspace hypothesis. Neuron 105 (5), 776 – 798. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2020.01.026 . 
Michel, M., Morales, J., 2020. Minority reports: consciousness and the prefrontal cortex. 
Mind Lang. 35 (4), 493 – 513. https://doi.org/10.1111/mila.12264 . 
Noy, N., Bickel, S., Zion-Golumbic, E., Harel, M., Golan, T., Davidesco, I., Schevon, C.A., 
McKhann, G.M., Goodman, R.R., Schroeder, C.E., Mehta, A.D., Malach, R., 2015. 
Ignition ’ s glow: ultra-fast spread of global cortical activity accompanying local 
“ ignitions ” in visual cortex during conscious visual perception. Conscious. Cognit. 
35, 206 – 224. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2015.03.006 . 
Oizumi, M., Albantakis, L., Tononi, G., 2014. From the phenomenology to the 
mechanisms of consciousness: integrated information theory 3.0. PLoS Comput. Biol. 
10 (5), e1003588 https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003588 . 
O ’ Reilly, R.C., Frank, M.J., 2006. Making working memory work: a computational model 
of learning in the prefrontal cortex and basal ganglia. Neural Comput. 18 (2), 
283 – 328. https://doi.org/10.1162/089976606775093909 . 
Paffen, C.L.E., Alais, D., Verstraten, F.A.J., 2006. Attention speeds binocular rivalry. 
Psychol. Sci. 17 (9), 752 – 756. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2006.01777.x . 
Panagiotaropoulos, T.I., Deco, G., Kapoor, V., Logothetis, N.K., 2012. Neuronal 
discharges and gamma oscillations explicitly reflect visual consciousness in the 
lateral prefrontal cortex. Neuron 74 (5), 924 – 935. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
neuron.2012.04.013 . 
Parr, T., Friston, K.J., 2017. Working memory, attention, and salience in active inference. 
Sci. Rep. 7 (1), 14678. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-15249-0 . 
Parr, T., Markovic, D., Kiebel, S.J., Friston, K.J., 2019. Neuronal message passing using 
Mean-field, Bethe, and Marginal approximations. Sci. Rep. 9 (1), 1889. https://doi. 
org/10.1038/s41598-018-38246-3 . 
Parr, T., Rikhye, R.V., Halassa, M.M., Friston, K.J., 2020. Prefrontal computation as 
active inference. Cerebr. Cortex 30 (2), 682 – 695. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/ 
bhz118 . 
Pitts, M.A., Padwal, J., Fennelly, D., Martínez, A., Hillyard, S.A., 2014. Gamma band 
activity and the P3 reflect post-perceptual processes, not visual awareness. 
Neuroimage 101, 337 – 350. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.07.024 . 
Prinz, J., 2012. The Conscious Brain. OUP, USA .  
Rottschy, C., Langner, R., Dogan, I., Reetz, K., Laird, A.R., Schulz, J.B., Fox, P.T., 
Eickhoff, S.B., 2012. Modelling neural correlates of working memory: a coordinate- 
based meta-analysis. Neuroimage 60 (1), 830 – 846. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
neuroimage.2011.11.050 . 
Sajid, N., Ball, P.J., Parr, T., Friston, K.J., 2021. Active inference: demystified and 
compared. Neural Comput. 33 (3), 674 – 712. https://doi.org/10.1162/neco_a_ 
01357 . 
Salti, M., Bar-Haim, Y., Lamy, D., 2012. The P3 component of the ERP reflects conscious 
perception, not confidence. Conscious. Cognit. 21 (2), 961 – 968. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.concog.2012.01.012 . 
Schlossmacher, I., Dellert, T., Pitts, M., Bruchmann, M., Straube, T., 2020. Differential 
effects of awareness and task relevance on early and late ERPs in a No-report visual 
oddball paradigm. J. Neurosci. 40 (14), 2906 – 2913. https://doi.org/10.1523/ 
JNEUROSCI.2077-19.2020 . 
Serences, J.T., Ester, E.F., Vogel, E.K., Awh, E., 2009. Stimulus-specific delay activity in 
human primary visual cortex. Psychol. Sci. 20 (2), 207 – 214. https://doi.org/ 
10.1111/j.1467-9280.2009.02276.x . 
Sergent, C., Baillet, S., Dehaene, S., 2005. Timing of the brain events underlying access to 
consciousness during the attentional blink. Nat. Neurosci. 8 (10), 1391 – 1400. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1549 . 
Sergent, C., Corazzol, M., Labouret, G., Stockart, F., Wexler, M., King, J.-R., Meyniel, F., 
Pressnitzer, D., 2021. Bifurcation in brain dynamics reveals a signature of conscious 
C.J. Whyte et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
Current Research in Neurobiology 3 (2022) 100036
14
processing independent of report. Nat. Commun. 12 (1), 1149. https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/s41467-021-21393-z . 
Seth, A.K., Hohwy, J., 2021. Predictive processing as an empirical theory for 
consciousness science. Cognit. Neurosci. 12 (2), 89 – 90. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
17588928.2020.1838467 . 
Smith, R., 2016. The relationship between consciousness, understanding, and rationality. 
Phil. Psychol. 29 (7), 943 – 957. https://doi.org/10.1080/09515089.2016.1172700 . 
Smith, R., 2017. A neuro-cognitive defense of the unified self. Conscious. Cognit. 48, 
21 – 39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2016.10.007 . 
Smith, R., Friston, K.J., Whyte, C.J., 2022. A step-by-step tutorial on active inference and 
its application to empirical data. J. Math. Psychol. 107, 102632. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jmp.2021.102632 . 
Smith, R., Lane, R.D., Parr, T., Friston, K.J., 2019. Neurocomputational mechanisms 
underlying emotional awareness: Insights afforded by deep active inference and their 
potential clinical relevance [Preprint]. Neuroscience. https://doi.org/10.1101/ 
681288 . 
Soto, D., M ¨antyl ¨a, T., Silvanto, J., 2011. Working memory without consciousness. Curr. 
Biol. 21 (22), R912 – R913. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2011.09.049 . 
Thomas Yeo, B.T., Krienen, F.M., Sepulcre, J., Sabuncu, M.R., Lashkari, D., 
Hollinshead, M., Roffman, J.L., Smoller, J.W., Z ¨ollei, L., Polimeni, J.R., Fischl, B., 
Liu, H., Buckner, R.L., 2011. The organization of the human cerebral cortex 
estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity. J. Neurophysiol. 106 (3), 1125 – 1165. 
https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00338.2011 . 
Tononi, G., Boly, M., Massimini, M., Koch, C., 2016. Integrated information theory: from 
consciousness to its physical substrate. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 17 (7), 450 – 461. https:// 
doi.org/10.1038/nrn.2016.44 . 
Tsuchiya, N., Wilke, M., Fr ¨assle, S., Lamme, V.A.F., 2015. No-report paradigms: 
extracting the true neural correlates of consciousness. Trends Cognit. Sci. 19 (12), 
757 – 770. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2015.10.002 . 
Vilas, M.G., Auksztulewicz, R., Melloni, L., 2021. Active inference as a computational 
framework for consciousness. Rev. Philo. Psychol. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13164- 
021-00579-w . 
Westbrook, A., Braver, T.S., 2016. Dopamine does double duty in motivating cognitive 
effort. Neuron 89 (4), 695 – 710. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2015.12.029 . 
Whyte, C.J., 2019. Integrating the global neuronal workspace into the framework of 
predictive processing: towards a working hypothesis. Conscious. Cognit. 73, 102763. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2019.102763 . 
Whyte, C.J., Smith, R., 2021. The predictive global neuronal workspace: a formal active 
inference model of visual consciousness. Prog. Neurobiol. 199, 101918. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.pneurobio.2020.101918 . 
Wolff, A., Berberian, N., Golesorkhi, M., Gomez-Pilar, J., Zilio, F., Northoff, G., 2022. 
Intrinsic neural timescales: temporal integration and segregation. Trends Cognit. Sci. 
26 (2), 159 – 173. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2021.11.007 . 
Ye, M., Lyu, Y., Sclodnick, B., Sun, H.-J., 2019. The P3 reflects awareness and can Be 
modulated by confidence. Front. Neurosci. 13, 510. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fnins.2019.00510 . 
C.J. Whyte et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                