Does the metaphysical dog wag its formal tail? 
The free energy principle and philosophical debates about 
life, mind, and matter 
Wanja Wiese (wanja.wiese@rub.de) 
Institute of Philosophy II, Ruhr University Bochum, Germany 
This paper is a commentary on Bruineberg, Dolega, Dewhurst, and Baltieri 
(forthcoming). The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets. Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences.  https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 
 
Abstract 
According to Bruineberg and colleagues, philosophical arguments on life, mind, and 
matter that are based on the free energy principle (FEP) (i) essentially draw on the 
Markov blanket construct and (ii) tend to assume that strong metaphysical claims can be 
justified on the basis of metaphysically innocuous formal assumptions provided by FEP. 
I argue against both (i) and (ii). 
Main text 
Bruineberg et al . distinguish between Markov blankets  (MBs) as properties of models 
(epistemic ‘Pearl blankets’ , PBs ) and MB s as properties of physical systems 
(metaphysical ‘Friston blankets’ , FBs ). Unlike PBs , FBs are not exclusively defined in 
terms of probabilistic relations between random variables. Instead, FBs are also defined 
in terms of causal relations to a system’s i nternal and external states: FBs comprise 
sensory and active states that mediate causal influences between internal and external 
states. In perceiving agents, this causal interplay between internal, external, and blanket 
states is supposed to capture perception-action loops (Friston, 2012). 
As Bruineberg et al.’s lucid analysis shows, a realist interpretation of the notion of an  FB 
is metaphysically demanding: positing the existence of a n FB entails a statement about 
the physical system, i.e., it entails th e existence of a boundary between internal and 
external states. Furthermore, the authors argue that the formalism that is used to identify 
internal, active, sensory, and external states (as in Friston, 2013) presupposes specific, 
non-arbitrary assumptions about the underlying model (target paper, sect . 4.1). This 
means that FB s are not theoretically neutral  descriptions of a model’s features. 
Furthermore, many descriptions of FB s in the literature are not metaphysically neutral , 
either, because they describe these blankets not just as properties of a model, but as 
boundaries of physical systems. As the authors point out, this is problematic to the 
extent that such metaphysical interpretations are assumed to “follow from the form al 
details” (target paper, sect. 4.2). 
In the context of FEP , the notion of an  MB is not just used to describe perception- action 
loops in certain self -organising systems. The distinction between internal, blanket, and 
external states is also invoked to des cribe the system’s internal states as 
representations of probability distributions (of external states, given blanket states). 
According to FEP, this enables a dual description of the system’s dynamics: on the one 
hand, in terms of the probabilistic evolution of internal states; on the other hand, in terms 
of the evolution of probabilistic beliefs about external states, parameterised by internal 
states (see Friston, 2019; Friston et al., 2020; see also Sprevak, 2020; Kiefer, 2020). 
Apart from claims about t he boundaries of minds, most philosophical claims about the 
relationships between life, mind, and matter do not essentially draw on the MB  construct 
provided by FEP . Contrary to what Bruineberg et al. suggest, the main philosophically 
fruitful idea afforded by FEP is that internal states can be regarded as probability 
distributions over external states, given sensory and active states ( see the examples 
given below). 
One could object that this presupposes the existence of a boundary between a system 
and its environment—which, as the authors argue, cannot be derived from FEP, without 
presupposing strong metaphysical assumptions. We can grant this for the sake of 
argument, because the assumption that there is a boundary between a system and its 
environment is s hared by many metaphysical theories of the mind (e.g., functionalism 
and, arguably, most versions of property physicalism), and none of these theories shows 
how to derive this partition from metaphysically innocuous assumptions. As long as 
FEP-based philosophical accounts avoid the mistake of assuming that FEP provides a 
metaphysically neutral way of determining boundaries, it is therefore not particularly 
problematic to posit the existence of a boundary between internal and external states 
(i.e., if it is problematic, it is problematic independently of FEP). 
Bruineberg et al.  argue that claims about the relationships between  life, mind, and 
matter must make further metaphysical assumptions that do not follow from FEP. The 
authors worry that these assumptions “may in the end be doing all of the interesting 
work themselves” (target paper, sect. 7 ). I disagree with this statement, but here I will 
focus on the concern, expressed by the authors, that researchers mistakenly believe the 
FEP can be used to “settle fundamental metaphysical questions” (target paper, sect. 1). 
In contrast to what Bruineberg et al.  insinuate, the fact that additional assumptions are 
needed to contribute to metaphysical debates is acknowledged in FEP-based arguments 
for philosophical claims. Let me illustrate this with  three examples ( involving my own 
work). 
In Friston et al. (2020), we argue that the most parsimonious interpretation of FEP’s dual 
description of internal states is a form  of property physicalism (reductive materialism)  
which we call Markovian monism . Crucially, we do not assume that this interpretation 
follows from the formalism itself : we co nsider and evaluate different metaphysical 
interpretations of the formalism (Friston et al., 2020, pp. 17–21). 
Wiese & Friston (2021a) argue that FEP is compatible with a strong continuity between 
life and mind. Again, this is not assumed to follow directl y from the formalism. Rather, 
we explicitly point out that we presuppose a mechanistic account of physical 
computation and a representationalist interpretation of predictive processing / active 
inference (Wiese & Friston, 2021a, pp. 10–13). 
In Wiese & Friston (2021b), we draw on the duality between the probabilistic evolution of 
internal states and the evolution of probabilistic beliefs (entailed by FEP) to argue: a self-
organising system is a conscious system (as opposed to a mere simulation of a 
conscious system) only if computational correlates of consciousness  (CCCs) are 
instantiated by the physical processes that help the system  sustain its existence  (for 
details, see Wiese & F riston, 2021b, pp. 22– 24). FEP is here primarily invoked to 
provide a precise description of how a  conscious system differs from a mere simulation: 
the dynamics of CCCs (in terms of probabilistic beliefs  encoded by internal states) must 
be equivalent to the dynamics of internal states in terms of the system’s non -equilibrium 
steady-state density. 
In sum, I disagree with the authors’ claim that FEP -based philosophical debates about 
the relationships between life, mind, and matter presuppose that FEP “can be used to 
settle fundamental metaphysical questions” (target article, sect . 1). Does this mean that 
the metaphysical heavy lifting is not done by FEP itself, but by additional metaphysical 
assumptions? I don’t think so: philosophical arguments require clear concepts, and this 
is exactly what FEP’s dual description of system dynamics affords. 
References 
Friston, K. (2012). A free energy principle for biological systems. Entropy , 14(11), 2100–
2121. https://doi.org/10.3390/e14112100 
Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it. Journal of The Royal Society Interface, 10(86). 
https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2013.0475 
Friston, K. (2019). A free energy principle for a particular physics . 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.10184 
Friston, K. J., Wiese, W., & Hobson, J. A. (2020). Sentience and the origins of 
consciousness: From Cartesian duality to Markovian monism. Entropy, 22(5), 516. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/e22050516 
Kiefer, A. B. ( 2020). Psychophysical identity and free energy. Journal of The Royal 
Society Interface, 17(169), 20200370. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2020.0370 
Sprevak, M. (2020). Two kinds of information processing in cognition. Review of 
Philosophy and Psychology, 11(3), 591–611. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13164-019-00438-
9 
Wiese, W., & Friston, K. J. (2021a). Examining the continuity between life and mind: Is 
there a continuity between autopoietic intentionality and representationality? 
Philosophies, 6(11), 18. https://doi.org/10.3390/philosophies6010018 
Wiese, W., & Friston, K. J. (2021b). The neural correlates of consciousness under the 
free energy principle: From computational correlates to computational explanation. 
Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 2, 9. https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2021.81 