Review article
Conscious active inference II: Quantum orchestrated objective reduction 
among intraneuronal microtubules naturally accounts for discrete 
perceptual cycles
Michael C. Wiest
a , *
, Arjan Singh Puniani
b
a
Neuroscience Department Wellesley College, 21 Wellesley College Rd., Wellesley, MA 02481, USA
b
University of Pittsburgh Rehab Neural Engineering Labs, 1622 Locust St, 4th Floor, Pittsburgh, PA 15219, USA
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Microtubules
Orch OR
Predictive coding
Active inference
Consciousness
Optimal control
Bayesian brain
ABSTRACT
In the first of two companion papers, we argued that classical neural mechanisms proposed to implement 
conscious active inference had failed to establish their biological plausibility in terms of realistic biophysical 
models. We further explained that conscious (temporally deep) active inference is mathematically equivalent to 
the path integral that underlies quantum dynamics. As such, we proposed that a quantum model provides a 
natural, biologically plausible mechanistic implementation of the processing required by active inference.
In this second paper we review the evidence establishing discrete non-overlapping cycles of perceptual 
inference, and argue that classical process models have so far failed to motivate or describe these discrete cycles 
in terms of realistic neural mechanisms. We then point out that the Orchestrated Objective Reduction (Orch OR) 
theory of consciousness naturally solves this fundamental problem.
Along the way, we review independent strong theoretical and experimental evidence from my (Wiest) lab and 
others ’ supporting the Orch OR quantum theory of consciousness as a collective quantum property of intra -
neuronal microtubules (MTs). This includes demonstration of room-temperature quantum effects in MTs, MT 
resonances controlling membrane spiking in living neurons, evidence that volatile anesthetics target MTs to 
cause unconsciousness, and direct biophysical evidence of a macroscopic entangled state in the living human 
brain. Intraneuronal MTs thus offer a biologically specific and experimentally supported substrate for imple -
menting conscious active inference in brains.
PAPER 2 Contents: 
1. The problem of discrete perceptual cycles.
2. Evidence for consciousness as Orchestrated Objective Reduction in 
brain microtubules.
3. Quantum Orch OR accounts for discrete perceptual cycles.
4. Summary and Outlook: testing and refining the quantum active 
inference model.
1. The problem of discrete perceptual cycles
1.1. Consciousness comes in discrete finite-duration moments
In the companion paper (conscious active inference I, Section 3), 
computational considerations led us to consider irreversible, discontin -
uous, and temporally indivisible neural dynamics for plausibly imple -
menting active inference. In this Section we point out that the 
neuroscience of consciousness leads to the same conclusion. Instead of a 
continuous “ stream, ” conscious experience is broken into discrete mo -
ments of perceptual decision [159,160,30,47,51,99] . Each moment 
represents integration over a short duration followed by a discrete 
(discontinuous) perception. In particular, each moment of experience 
somehow integrates a brief duration into the “ specious present. ” If this 
were not so we could not perceive movement.
Recall from Sections 2 and 3 of the previous paper that temporally 
deep (conscious) active inference requires a period of integration to 
produce a perceptual or motor output. If two such periods were to 
overlap in time, they might produce conflicting perceptual in -
terpretations and motor outputs. In active inference it probably doesn ’ t 
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: mwiest@wellesley.edu (M.C. Wiest), ARP150@pitt.edu (A.S. Puniani). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal
journal homepag e: www.else vier.com/loc ate/csbj
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csbj.2025.09.016
Received 6 August 2025; Received in revised form 9 September 2025; Accepted 11 September 2025  
Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal 30 (2025) 94–107 
Available online 13 September 2025 
2001-0370/© 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Research Network of Computational and Structural Biotechnology. This is an open access 
article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 
make sense for the windows of perceptual integration to be overlapping 
or continuous.
Recall also that our focus on active inference, as opposed to other 
models of consciousness or perceptual inference, is based on the unique 
mathematical equivalence that we demonstrated in the previous paper 
between conscious active inference and the quantum path integral that 
governs all quantum dynamics. This mathematical equivalence doesn ’ t 
apply to any other model of optimized perception and behavior. It 
rigorously justifies our proposal that a quantum system could implement 
conscious active inference.
How do we know that conscious experience is broken into discrete 
moments? First, neural signals representing auditory and visual inputs 
are processed at different latencies, but perceived as simultaneous. This 
problem of synchronizing signals in conscious perception which are 
asynchronous in the brain appears to imply that neural signals are in -
tegrated over a finite time window to generate the conscious impression 
of synchrony or serial order between any two stimuli.
This conceptual argument is strongly supported by direct experi -
mental evidence of a minimal duration of neural activation required for 
conscious perception. By electrically stimulating the cortex of awake 
humans, Benjamin Libet found that conscious tactile perception 
required a minimum duration of neural activation on the order of 
100 – 200 ms [106 – 109,119] .
Consistent with these results, a large literature on backward masking 
shows that perception of brief stimuli can be altered or prevented from 
occurring by introducing new stimuli within a few hundred milliseconds 
[113 – 115,142] . Similarly, the color phi effect [98] and flash-lag illusion 
[37,38] demonstrate that each moment of perception is based on inte -
grating over a few hundred milliseconds of the recent past. A recent 
comprehensive review catalogs many other fascinating perceptual ex -
periments conclusively establishing that perception comes in discrete 
non-overlapping temporal windows [47] .
An EEG study of binocular rivalry [174] showed that these finite 
duration conscious moments correspond to bursts of gamma-frequency 
inter-areal synchronization, which recur rhythmically at frequencies in 
the theta or alpha range ( Fig. 1 ). Each moment synchronizes activity 
across distributed areas housing neurons encoding the contents of 
consciousness at that moment. Experimental results like these ( [49,50] , 
2006; [99,139] ) support James ’ conclusion, argued at length in Princi -
ples of Psychology [83] , that “ every cognition is due to one integral pulse 
of thought. ”
This is also true under the active inference formalism: each tempo -
rally deep inference about what to do next requires integration over the 
recent past and possible futures, to decide on one consistent — i.e., 
“ integral ”— course of action [127] . In other words, conscious active 
inference implies discrete finite-duration windows of integration [127] . 
We noted this above and in Sections 2 and 3 of the prior paper (conscious 
active inference I).
It is critical to appreciate that this requirement for temporally deep 
agents to integrate over finite-duration time windows remains equally 
true whether we adopt a discrete time formulation or a continuous time 
formulation of active inference. This is because the sentient agent in 
active inference optimizes expected free energy, which is free energy 
integrated over some time window into the future [127] .
White [167] argued for a “ sliding-window ” continuous alternative to 
discrete perceptual update cycles, but this is ruled out by the micro -
stimulation and backward masking effects we reviewed above. That is, 
under a slide-window picture, new stimuli should be perceived imme -
diately (i.e., after conduction delays) regardless of what stimuli come 
after them. Instead, a later stimulus can prevent an earlier stimulus from 
being perceived. The sliding-window hypothesis cannot account for the 
enormous psychophysical literature on such backward masking [47] . It 
also appears unable to account for how asynchronous neural signals can 
be experienced as simultaneous, since new stimuli are supposed to be 
processed and experienced continuously, but their neural representa -
tions are admittedly asynchronous due to unequal conduction delays in 
different modules and modalities [11,170] .
Fekete et al., [43] articulated a different argument against discrete 
perceptual updates. First, as we reviewed in Section 3 of the previous 
article (conscious active inference I), their perspective argued that 
continuous-time dynamical attractor systems with time constants of the 
magnitude associated with neuronal population dynamics are simply 
too slow to serve as the neural implementation. They also argue that 
continuous dynamical attractors are simply too … continuous to 
Fig. 1. Discrete moments of experience correspond to rhythmic bursts of large-scale gamma synchronization. Top : EEG data demonstrating rhythmic gamma 
synchronization time-locked to button-presses signaling perceptual switches during binocular rivalry. Bottom panels : Schematic depicting left and right eye stimuli 
during binocular rivalry; and the interpretation of the gamma synchronization data in terms of discrete moments of perception, recurring at a frequency in the theta 
range. Figures reproduced from Doesburg et al. (2009). Rhythms of consciousness: Binocular rivalry reveals large-scale oscillatory network dynamics mediating 
visual perception. PLOS ONE , 4(7), e6142. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0006142 , licensed under CC BY 3.0.
M.C. Wiest and A.S. Puniani                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal 30 (2025) 94–107 
95 
implement discrete inference updates. “In the ideal scenario this neces -
sitates that the transition between two distinct successive states will be 
instantaneous…. Thus, regardless of the nature of the proposed states, 
for the neuronal case for discreteness to be plausible, at least some 
neurons should switch states nearly instantaneously (i.e., at a rate of 
change that is qualitatively different from non-switching epochs).” Such 
near-instantaneous switching among quasi-stable global patterns of 
brain activity is well-documented ( [49,50] , 2006; [99,139] ). The 
question is: what could its mechanistic basis be?
The classical models are continuous, but both neurophysiological 
and psychophysical data imply discrete transitions. Remember that 
continuous conscious update models are ruled out by backward masking 
and microstimulation results implying a discrete update after a minimal 
duration of neural activation. But the classical models are incurably 
continuous, even when they explicitly include spikes.
Discontinuous stochastic jumps are postulated in some process 
models; but, as we reviewed in Section 3 of the companion paper, at time 
scales relevant to perception, those models have no mechanistic basis for 
the stochasticity they postulate. How do we know this? We saw in the 
previous paper (conscious active inference I) that neither deterministic 
nor stochastic process models were able to account for the observed 
stochasticity of real neurons in vivo. The deterministic models could 
appeal to synaptic failures or input variability, but experimental studies 
have established that synaptic stochasticity and input variability do not 
account for the full stochasticity of neurons in vivo [19,21,45,8,82,9] . 
Stochastic process models similarly cannot account for the stochasticity 
they postulate, since real neurons are understood to be governed by the 
deterministic Hodgkin-Huxley equations; and again, neither synaptic 
stochasticity nor input variability added to the HH model account for the 
variability of real neurons in vivo.
This appears to leave the classical approach without a candidate 
mechanism to account for the empirically necessary discrete cycles of 
conscious active inference.
We have raised these points to note that the perceptual cycle of 
temporally deep active inference is continuous in the classical formu -
lation, without any discontinuity in the physical dynamics to correspond 
to the cycle of discrete inference/decision/perception events indicated 
by the evidence we have just reviewed. This issue can be addressed in a 
classical model by devising a neural threshold for perceptual or behav -
ioral decisions to be “actualized” [147] . A neural threshold is obviously 
biologically plausible for neurons, which integrate charge and fire a 
spike if they reach a voltage threshold. But this approach raises the 
question: what is different about the particular neuron or neurons which 
ignite a conscious moment when they reach their spiking threshold, as 
compared to all the other neurons who fire spikes unconsciously? The 
classical model can only address this issue functionally, rather than 
ontologically, by distinguishing the (experimenter-imputed) functions of 
the neurons whose spikes trigger conscious moments. Active inference 
process models to date have used idealized rules in which a discrete 
inferential update is performed at the end of a fixed “theta” or “alpha” 
rhythm cycles, without any mechanistic basis [124,125,3,54] .
Another study showed that inference could be performed in a 
continuous time model [23] but did not explicitly treat temporally deep 
(i.e. conscious) agents, who require discrete cycles of planning and 
inference. As we emphasized above, a continuous formulation without 
finite-width windows of integration does not describe a conscious agent. 
“Temporally deep” refers to precisely to this finite duration window of 
integration. Such integration over simulated future time is evidently 
necessary to consider and weigh the potential outcomes of various 
policies (plans) over time.
Parr et al., [126] emphasize the importance of “chunking of time into 
discrete cognitive units,” or sequences of events, for planning and motor 
control. They model an agent “inferring when to move” its arm in order 
to match a rhythmic sensory input. The model relies on an array of 
idealized neural oscillator “clocks” and infers which clock best explains 
the sensory input in order to time an appropriate movement. It can 
account for relatively sudden, “discrete” movements, and it impressively 
accounts for features of Parkinson’s disease. However, while it captures 
“proximate” temporal dependencies in the trajectories of distribution 
parameters, it does not represent whole trajectories in a temporally deep 
path integral.
More importantly, the discrete movements generated by the model in 
this context are not spontaneously emerging cycles of perceptual infer -
ence. Rather, the study models how an agent can time movements to 
match predictable external stimuli. Similarly, [52] model spontaneous 
generation of discrete eyeblinks, but discrete movements are not 
equivalent to the spontaneously generated non-overlapping discrete 
cycles of perceptual inference we are trying to account for. Sequences of 
movements, although they might be describable as discrete events [125, 
55] , are not sequences of perceptual inference cycles.
None of these models imply discrete non-overlapping cycles of 
inference in a context with no movement, so they do not represent an 
account of non-overlapping cycles of perceptual integration and infer -
ence in temporally deep agents. For example, in binocular rivalry ex -
periments like those we reviewed above, subjects observe changes in 
percept even if they are not making movements to report those changes. 
Perceptual cycles emerge spontaneously even when no movements are 
demanded by the situation. This is what we need a model to account for.
Fleming, Michel [47] comment: “One might argue that it would be 
more adaptive for a system to engage in a continuous and dynamic 
process of perception and planning, with no discrete switches between 
the two. Further theoretical work will be required to understand 
whether and how the temporal windowing of perception implied by 
postdictive effects in perception is adaptive for the control of behavior. 
One possible advantage is that a slower temporal oscillation of percep -
tion and (active) inference allows for the comparison and selection 
among distinct counterfactual action plans, all conditioned on the same 
(comparable) world model [81,91] .” This conjecture is consistent with 
our considerations at the start of this Section.
Rabinovich et al., [139] used rate-based Lotka-Volterra-like models 
to explore how neural populations could generate sudden discrete 
transitions in activity patterns. However, these models involved no 
inferential dynamics: they are not active inference process models. 
Moreover, like the classical process models we reviewed in the com -
panion paper, these models are not validated by realistic 
Hodgkin-Huxley (HH) based single-neuron models. HH-based models 
have not been shown to be capable of robustly behaving like the 
mathematical idealizations on fast sub-second time scales.
Thus, active inference is currently without a demonstrated biologi -
cally realistic mechanism to implement discrete perceptual cycles. 
Recall from the prior companion paper that we accepted active inference 
as a coarse description of how the brain operates. We are not questioning 
the active inference theory: we are questioning the implementation using 
classical HH-based neurons, because it has not been demonstrated. This 
applies to the implementation of discrete inferential cycles in the same 
way it did to the computational operations that we focused on in the 
prior paper.
2. Evidence for consciousness as orchestrated objective 
reduction in brain microtubules
The purpose of the present two-part Review, focused on neural imple -
mentations of active inference, is to suggest the collective dipole state of 
neural microtubules (MTs) as the quantum system used by the brain to 
implement conscious active inference. Orchestrated Objective Reduc -
tion (Orch OR) [134,69–71] is the specific quantum microtubule con -
sciousness theory we have in mind. Orch OR identifies moments of 
conscious experience as a property of the quantum wave-function 
collapse process, actualizing one out of many possible states of the MT 
electric dipoles (and associated state of the electromagnetic/photon 
field). In this context wave-function collapse is roughly synonymous 
with objective reduction (OR) of the quantum state-vector. This means 
M.C. Wiest and A.S. Puniani                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal 30 (2025) 94–107 
96 
Orch OR adopts a specific solution to quantum theory ’ s Measurement 
Problem, as we will review in Section 3 below.
In non-biological matter OR corresponds to “ proto-conscious ” 
events, whereas living creatures have evolved structures like MTs and 
neurons to “ orchestrate ” more complex and useful states and dynamics, 
during which many microscopic processes are integrated into “ macro -
scopic ” conscious experiences like ours [168] .
In order for this hypothesis to be plausible, we need to establish 
several dubitable points: 
1. That a macroscopic quantum state of neural microtubules can exist in 
living animals at physiological temperature;
2. The collective MT state must be “ programable ” by the patterns of 
electrical activity across the neural membrane, since we know sen -
sory inputs that we experience consciously are encoded in the 
membrane potential;
3. The MT state must be able to react back on the membrane potential, 
since we know our behavior is implemented by action potentials in 
motor neurons; and
4. The collective MT state must span many neurons if it is to incorporate 
the diverse sensory features that we experience at a given moment, 
since these are encoded by neurons distributed across cortex: in other 
words, to solve the phenomenal binding problem.
After reviewing evidence supporting these points, we will be better 
prepared to appreciate how Orch OR could implement conscious active 
inference and solve the problem of discrete perceptual cycles, in Section 
3 below.
2.1. Direct biophysical evidence of a consciousness-related quantum state 
in living humans
In a recent series of experiments Kerskens and P ´erez [137,93] used a 
novel quantum entanglement-detection method applied to conscious 
humans in an MRI scanner. They reported strong evidence for an 
entangled brain state related to consciousness and working memory 
performance. They used an unconventional MRI protocol designed to 
isolate signals from entangled states, and observed an MRI signal that 
mimicked heartbeat-evoked potentials recorded with EMG. The authors 
argued the observed signal implied the existence of an entangled brain 
state that was capable of coupling with the nuclear spins in water 
molecules that were entrained by the MRI machine. Because the fidelity 
of the putative spin-entanglement signal correlated with short-term 
memory performance [137] and the presence or absence of the 
conscious state itself in sleep vs waking [93] , the authors concluded that 
the quantum brain processes are likely an important part of our cogni -
tive and conscious brain functions. Their interpretation in terms of 
entanglement has been challenged [165] , but that author offered no 
alternative classical account of the signal they observed. Interestingly, 
anesthesia research has also implicated nuclear spin in the mechanism of 
anesthesia [104] . This result is baffling on the assumption that anes -
thetics work by standard chemical (i.e. electronic) binding at receptors, 
but is understandable in terms of a quantum model of consciousness 
[72] .
Could MTs be the substrate of the consciousness-related quantum 
brain state? In a word, yes. The hypothesis that macroscopic quantum 
effects might be functionally relevant for neuroscience has been widely 
considered physically implausible based on the intuition that the brain is 
too hot to support delicate quantum effects [155] . Tegmark ’ s influential 
estimate was criticized almost immediately on multiple grounds [168, 
67] . For example, Tegmark ’ s analysis modelled a system at thermal 
equilibrium — which is equivalent to death, and therefore not appro -
priate for modelling a living system. In any case, we now have decisive 
experimental evidence that MTs can support collective quantum effects 
(specifically superradiance) at room temperature . Moreover, the strength 
of the quantum effect increases rather than decreases with increasing 
size of structures built from MT subunits ( Fig. 2 ).
Superradiance refers to exceptionally bright and coherent emission 
of light. It is a quantum phenomenon similar to a laser. It is being 
explored as means of communication and computation through nano -
fiber waveguides [151,97] , taking advantage of “ infinite-range ” dipole 
interactions like those underlying the hypothesized collective MT 
oscillatory state. This context suggests “ the tantalizing possibility that 
[MT-rich] axons might serve as such waveguides between giant super -
radiant emitters in the brain ” [12] . This is the proffered mechanism for 
establishing entanglement among MTs in different neurons, necessary 
for quantum computation and the unity of consciousness.
These results strongly support the possibility that MTs could 
contribute to the consciousness-related quantum state reported by Ker -
skens and Perez.
Further evidence for the hypothesis that the biological substrate of 
consciousness is a collective quantum state of intraneuronal MTs comes 
from considering the molecular mechanisms by which volatile anes -
thetics reversibly render us un conscious.
2.2. Anesthesia, consciousness, and microtubules (MTs)
My lab recently reported that rats administered with a brain- 
penetrant MT-binding drug took significantly longer to fall uncon -
scious under the volatile anesthetic isoflurane [95] , suggesting that 
isoflurane causes unconsciousness at least in part by binding to MTs 
( Fig. 3 ). The effect size was “ large ” as assessed by a Cohen ’ s d value of 
1.9. The idea that MT-modulating drugs interact functionally with iso -
flurane anesthesia was dramatically confirmed in a recent study in mice 
[105] . These results are consistent with reports that volatile anesthetics 
bind to MTs [123,59,86] , and with a behavioral experiment demon -
strating that an anthracene-based anesthetic reversibly immobilized 
tadpoles by acting on their MTs [40] . Similarly, a clinical study of 
anesthetic usage by human surgery patients given MT-stabilizing 
chemotherapy (which generally penetrates poorly into the brain) 
compared to control subjects found a slight anesthetic resistance in the 
patients given the MT-binding drug [111] .
Although contemporary authors tend to assume that many molecular 
targets contribute significantly to causing unconsciousness [116,74] , 
multiple striking empirical facts appear to suggest that diverse volatile 
anesthetic compounds act primarily on a single highly-conserved mo -
lecular target protein to selectively abolish consciousness. First there is 
the venerable Meyer-Overton correlation [90] between anesthetic po -
tency and solubility in olive oil over several orders of magnitude 
( Fig. 4 a). It suggests that anesthetics interact via weak physical in -
teractions such as van der Waals forces among induced dipoles rather 
than ionic binding. Why? Because the volatile anesthetics are chemically 
diverse. It appears highly unlikely that they would all fit the same spe -
cific chemical binding site on a protein receptor, like keys with different 
shapes fitting into the same lock. Another alternative interpretation of 
the Meyer-Overton correlation might be that it reflects the advantage 
that lipophilic compounds have in penetrating the blood-brain-barrier 
and lipid-rich brain tissue. If this latter interpretation were true, one 
would expect more psychoactive drugs to show the same Meyer-Overton 
correlation. But the correlation is specific to volatile anesthetics.
Similarly, the Meyer-Overton correlation is consistent with the 
known binding of volatile anesthetics in hydrophobic pockets of diverse 
proteins [48] . This accounts for the promiscuous binding of volatile an -
esthetics, but fails to account for the specific functional effects on con -
sciousness due to inconsistent effects of binding to the various candidate 
targets [39] .
Moreover, this interpretation (assuming multiple other molecular 
targets such as ion channels and synaptic receptors) ignores the detailed 
biophysical modelling of [29] (reviewed briefly below) which strongly 
supports the physical interaction hypothesis, with microtubules in 
particular (where the functional effects happen in hydrophobic pockets 
in the tubulin proteins).
M.C. Wiest and A.S. Puniani                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal 30 (2025) 94–107 
97 
Moreover, if the anesthetics target multiple molecular targets, the 
Meyer-Overton correlation seems to imply that all the targets in diverse 
proteins share highly similar binding properties. A unitary molecular 
target might be more plausible than a varying combination of ion 
channels and other targets.
Second, the effective dose for a given anesthetic varies little across 
diverse species [39] , despite wide variability in the profiles of different 
ion channels in each animal. A third remarkable property of these 
compounds is the approximately linear additivity of their effects, despite 
variable effects of each anesthetic on specific ion channel targets 
( Fig. 4 b). For example, isoflurane activates GABA receptors relatively 
strongly while cyclopropane has only a small effect — but nevertheless 
half of an effective dose of isoflurane plus half the effective dose of 
cyclopropane results in a full effective dose. Fig. 4 b shows several such 
combinations chosen for their differential effects on a particular candi -
date ion channel. Examples like these appear to show that no single ion 
channel can account for the unconsciousness caused by inhalational 
anesthetics. Importantly, a systematic analysis of available evidence also 
appeared to show that no combination of ion channel targets can account 
for the pattern of empirical results either [39] , leaving those authors 
perplexed. Since then the field has tended to assume that anesthesia is 
mediated by a combination of ion channels and other targets [116,74] ; 
but this approach fails to account for the Meyer-Overton correlation and 
other remarkable facts we just reviewed.
However, none of these analyses ruled out microtubules (MTs) as the 
primary molecular mediator of inhalational anesthesia. Remarkably, a 
detailed quantum chemical modeling study found that the potencies of 
several volatile anesthetics were predicted by their binding affinity to 
delocalized electron sites within the tubulin subunits that make up MTs 
[28,29] . These theoretical results essentially reproduce the Meyer-Overton 
correlation by assuming that inhalational anesthesia is primarily mediated 
by MTs. This has not been demonstrated for any other candidate mo -
lecular target. Thus, MTs could be the primary molecular target which 
mediates the unconsciousness caused by inhalational anesthetics.
Their promiscuous binding at hydrophobic pockets in a variety of 
proteins in the brain and spinal cord, is one reason inhalational anes -
thetics are generally believed to cause unconsciousness by acting on 
some combination of ion channels and receptors, synaptic proteins and 
gap junctions, mitochondria, and cytoskeletal proteins including mi -
crotubules [116,74,92] . Moreover, it is likely that other molecular tar -
gets besides MTs contribute to anesthesia. For example, binding to 
GABA receptors does appear to contribute to unconsciousness caused by 
isoflurane, because mice with non-functional GABARs are somewhat 
resistant to isoflurane [152] . To a first approximation, if binding to MTs 
Fig. 2. Microtubule (MT) quantum super radiance at room temperature increases with size of the MT structure. (a) Protein structure of a single tubulin dimer, 
the subunit that polymerizes to form MTs. (b) Microtubule segment. (c) Centriole formed from nine triplets of MTs. (d) Hexagonal bundle of 19 MTs from a typical 
mammalian axon. (e) Strength of room temperature superradiance as a function of the size of a single MT. Quantum Yield is a measure of fluorescence intensity: the 
ratio of the number of emitted photons per time and volume to the number of absorbed photons. W parametrizes “ structural disorder, ” to establish the robustness of 
the phenomenon. Figures reproduced from Babcock et al. [12] , Journal of Physical Chemistry B , 128(35), 7941 – 7953. Licensed under CC BY 4.0. https://doi.org/10.10 
21/acs.jpcb.4c01991 .
Fig. 3. Rats given a MT-binding drug (epoB 0.75 mg/kg) were resistant to 
isoflurane anesthesia. The standard proxy for time to fall unconscious is the 
latency to Loss of Righting Reflex (LORR), meaning that a rat placed on its back 
does not right itself. The average LORR latency was 69 s higher in the post-epoB 
condition as compared with the pre-epoB average, and this difference was 
statistically significant (two-sided permutation t -test; N = 8 rats; p = 0.0016; 
Cohen ’ s d = 1.9). The difference remained significant when we omitted eight 
outliers from the post-epoB dataset (p = 0.005; d = 5.4). Both groups are 
plotted on the left axes; the mean difference is plotted on a floating axis on the 
right as a bootstrap sampling distribution. The mean difference is depicted as a 
dot; the 95 % confidence interval is indicated by the ends of the vertical error 
bar. Figure reproduced from Khan, S., Huang, Y., Timuçin, D., Bailey, S., Lee, S., 
Lopes, J., Gaunce, E., Mosberger, J., Zhan, M., Abdelrahman, B., Zeng, X., & 
Wiest, M.C. [95] . Microtubule-Stabilizer Epothilone B Delays 
Anesthetic-Induced Unconsciousness in Rats. eNeuro , 11(8), 
ENEURO.0291 – 24.2024. https://doi.org/10.1523/ENEURO.0291-24.2024 , 
licensed under CC BY 4.0.
M.C. Wiest and A.S. Puniani                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal 30 (2025) 94–107 
98 
can explain the Meyer-Overton correlation between anesthetic potency 
and binding at a specific lipophilic site [29] , then contributions from 
other mechanisms would represent the deviations from the linear rela -
tion visible in Fig. 4 a. It is conceivable that a classical model of con -
sciousness could account for the contribution of MT-binding to causing 
unconsciousness, but this interpretation is not favored by current evi -
dence [168,173,75] . Instead, quantum optical effects in MTs have been 
shown to be dampened by inhalational anesthetics [87] , supporting the 
quantum view.
So far we have addressed the first dubitable point in our list of four 
above: we have direct biophysical evidence of a consciousness-related 
quantum state in the human brain, and we have strong and varied 
experimental and theoretical evidence that a collective quantum vi -
bration of MTs could be its physical substrate.
Points 2 and 3 from our list above require two-way communication 
between the collective quantum MT state and voltage dynamics (spikes) 
on the neural membrane. MTs are well-situated in neurons to integrate 
electrical activity on the neural membrane (for example via calcium 
influx during neural activity) and in turn modulate neural membrane 
voltages and spiking activity (for example by modulating synaptic 
release probabilities, which are known to be stochastic, “ noisy, ” or 
“ unreliable ” ). As such they appear to offer an ideal candidate medium 
for intracellular integration and adaptive responding. They are evolu -
tionarily plausible candidates because they are present in all eukaryotic 
cells, in which they perform numerous cellular functions related to 
integration of environmental signals and coordinating movement [122, 
161,162,2,24,4 – 7,88] .
2.3. Microtubule resonances span multiple neurons and control neural 
spiking activity
But we need not speculate further because we have amazing exper -
imental evidence from Anirban Bandyopadhyay and colleagues, that MT 
resonances predict and control the spiking activity of neurons. They 
stimulated MT resonances in cultured neurons and observed the reso -
nance state spanning across multiple neurons and controlling membrane 
voltage [141,149,150] . These experiments strongly support the physical 
plausibility of the quantum microtubule consciousness hypothesis.
They also address the fourth and final, crucial point in our list above: 
the necessity for the quantum substrate of consciousness to span mul -
tiple neurons. We require this because it is clear that the neural repre -
sentations of various consciously perceived sensory features are widely 
distributed across cortex. If the substrate of our experience is the col -
lective state of intraneuronal MTs, it must have simultaneous access to 
the perceptual representations distributed across cortex, and it must 
somehow fuse them into a single unified percept. Such a fusion is illu -
sory and epiphenomenal in a classical model [96] , but causally effica -
cious in a quantum model [168] .
These results are worth dwelling on briefly because they appear to 
conflict with Hodgkin and Huxley ’ s heroic discoveries [76 – 80] . How do 
we reconcile our knowledge that neurons fire deterministically based on 
whether current inputs drive the membrane voltage to threshold or not 
(supported by countless experimental studies), with these experimental 
results in living neurons demonstrating another way of controlling a 
neuron ’ s spiking activity? In the last century, the field appeared justified 
in neglecting all but the “ skin ” of neurons, because Hodgkin and Hux -
ley ’ s experiments demonstrated that neurons (axons) were capable of 
producing action potentials even when they had been “ hollowed out ” 
[13 – 16] . Now it appears that we were reckless in forgetting that the 
interior might still have functional relevance in the real physiological 
context [65] .
3. Quantum orchestrated objective reduction accounts for 
discrete perceptual cycles
Returning to the problem of discrete non-overlapping perceptual 
cycles: identifying discrete moments of inference and consciousness 
with individual quantum collapses of the MT state as described in Orch 
OR automatically introduces the empirically-supported discontinuity 
into the dynamics, and provides a physical basis for discrete decision 
cycles required by active inference and confirmed experimentally. Orch 
OR also provides an objective, ontological basis for distinguishing the 
conscious brains states from unconscious ones. State-vector reduction 
violates the continuous “ unitary ” quantum evolution (such as is 
Fig. 4. Anesthetic properties suggesting a common “ unitary ” molecular target. (a) The Meyer-Overton correlation for inhalational anesthetics. The 
effective dose (vertical axis) is predicted by solubility in olive oil (horizontal axis), suggesting a weak physical interaction at an evolutionarily conserved lipophilic 
target, rather than chemical lock-and-key binding. (b) Additivity of effective doses (of “ MACs ” ). One-half the effective dose of one anesthetic plus one half the 
effective dose of another anesthetic equals one effective dose, even when the two anesthetics have very different effects on a particular ion channel, arguing against 
ion channels as the primary functional target of inhalational anesthetics. Eger, E.I. II, Raines, D.E., Shafer, S.L., Hemmings, H.C. Jr., & Sonner, J.M. (2008). Is a new 
paradigm needed to explain how inhaled anesthetics produce immobility? Anesthesia & Analgesia , 107(3), 832 – 848. https://doi.org/10.1213/ane.0b013e318182a 
edb . Reproduced with permission from Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. The Creative Commons license does not apply to this content.
M.C. Wiest and A.S. Puniani                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal 30 (2025) 94–107 
99 
described by the Schr ¨odinger equation) to introduce a discontinuous, 
holistic, irreversible decision. It is actually instantaneous [70] as in the 
ideal case of [43] . This is a fundamental difference between a contin -
uous local classical model and a quantum physical model incorporating 
OR.
Recall the perceptual inference cycle that we outlined in Section 2 of 
the companion paper (active inference I). In step 1 a prediction is 
generated from prior beliefs about the world including the agent itself, 
and in step 2 the prediction is compared to new inputs to calculate 
updated, corrected posterior beliefs. These posterior beliefs then act as 
the priors to generate predictions for the next cycle of inference. We 
further outlined a rough match between cortical circuitry ( Fig. 1 of the 
companion paper) and neural modules, and variables in active inference 
process models ( Fig. 2 of the companion paper). This coarse match 
suggested the computations that neurons in the different modules 
contribute to the overall predictive processing algorithm. In turning 
from a classical to a quantum implementation, we retain the functional 
mapping suggested by active inference process models. The neurons 
retain their hypothesized functional profiles, but the required stochas -
ticity and path integration is provided by the quantum Orch OR 
dynamics.
Under the Orch OR picture ( Fig. 5 ), the two steps of the inference 
cycle would play out as follows: 
• In Step 1: the information encoded in the predictive neural pop -
ulations is transmitted to the collective state of MTs inside those 
neurons, for example via activity-dependent calcium influx through 
voltage-gated calcium channels which are ubiquitous in cortical 
dendrites. At the same time, sensory information representing cur -
rent observable outcomes is likewise imprinted into the vibrational 
state of intraneuronal MTs in sensory areas.
• In Step 2: Network interactions allow the fusion of the predictive and 
outcome representations from Step 1 into a collective MT state of the 
combined populations. Classically impossible quantum integration 
of these MT states allows the quantum evolution to find a next state 
that minimizes the physical action, which has been orchestrated (by 
the neural activity pattern) to represent the agent ’ s prior beliefs and 
the corrections due to sensory inputs. Due to this orchestrated cor -
respondence, minimizing the physical action can be interpreted as 
minimizing the “ expected free energy ” of active inference, which 
practically means optimizing our beliefs and actions. The “ next state ” 
is actualized, or realized, upon objective collapse of the MT state- 
vector representing superpositions of possible beliefs. In other 
words, Orch OR of the collective MT state generates the sensory- 
updated posterior belief-state, which is transmitted back to influ -
ence voltage spiking activity on the membrane (for example by 
modulating synaptic failure probability), to serve as the prior for the 
next cycle.
3.1. Objective collapse criterion
Recall from the previous paper (conscious active inference I) that 
quantum theory has a Measurement Problem (MP), in that the theory 
determines probabilities of measurement outcomes but does not define 
what physical process counts as a measurement. Objective Reduction 
theories address the MP by positing that state-vector reduction (wave -
function collapse) is real, objective, physical process. The so-called 
Diosi-Penrose (DP) objective reduction (OR) scheme [129 – 133,33,34]
assumed in Orch OR is one of a number of OR models in which state 
collapse is induced by gravity [136,62,89] .
The intuition is that superpositions of masses in different spatial 
positions will be unstable because of the difference in gravitational self- 
energy implied by the different spatial configurations. Under the DP OR 
scheme, the average time T until spontaneous collapse is given by 
T ≈
h
2 π E
(1) 
where h is Planck ’ s constant and E is the gravitational self-energy of the 
difference between the two superposed distributions of mass (in the 
simplest case) [70,71] . In other words, E is the energy to move the 
masses through the gravitational field (spacetime geometry in general 
relativity) from one superposed configuration to the other. The average 
collapse time is analogous to the half-life of a radioactive decay. A larger 
difference in energy implies a shorter collapse time. In order for Orch OR 
to be viable as a theory of consciousness, the quantum system that is to 
implement Orch OR must remain sufficiently shielded from environ -
mental decoherence.
To apply this collapse theory to the MT system, Hameroff and Pen -
rose [70] considered superpositions of different conformational states of 
tubulin dimers within a MT. They assumed conformational displace -
ments of these dimer subunits by d = 0.2 nm, about one tenth the 
diameter r of each monomer making up a tubulin dimer. They modeled 
spatial displacements of the tubulin dimers at three different levels: (i) as 
partially separated protein spheres, (ii) as completely separated atomic 
nuclei, or (iii) as completely separated nucleons (protons and neutrons).
For case (i), overlapping monomer protein spheres, they derived the 
energy E of partial separation as 
E =
GM
2
d
2
2 r
2
( 1  
3 d
8 r
+
d
2
80 r
3
)
where G is the gravitational constant, M is the monomer mass of 55 
kDaltons, r is the radius of a monomer sphere, and d = r /10 is the su -
perposition separation.
Case (ii), describing tubulin as two arrays of carbon atoms, results in 
a simpler formula because the carbon nucleus displacement is greater 
than its radius (complete separation): 
E ≈
Gm
2
a
c 
where m is the mass of a carbon atom (12 Daltons) and a
c 
is the carbon 
Fig. 5. Schematic implementation of two-way communication between 
membrane voltage and collective quantum MT state. An active neuron ( red 
dashed outline ) excites the postsynaptic membrane causing calcium influx ( pink 
cloud ) through voltage-gated channels ( blue pairs ), which modulates the state of 
MTs ( long green bars ) and MAPs ( short red bars ). This is how sensory information 
may be imprinted onto the MTs state. After the optimizing dynamic of the 
quantum path integral, objective reduction (OR) of the collective MTs state 
occurs, generating a sensory-updated “ posterior ” state. This state acts back on 
the membrane spiking activity through light-sensitive actin at the synapses ( red 
ovals ) acting as “ logic gates. ” MTs in the axon, acting as waveguides to establish 
the quantum entanglement across many neurons necessary for quantum 
computation and phenomenal binding, are not shown for clarity.
M.C. Wiest and A.S. Puniani                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal 30 (2025) 94–107 
100 
nucleus radius. Case (iii) results in the same approximate formula with m 
and a
c 
replaced by the nucleon mass and radius. These displacement 
energies are for single atoms or nucleons, respectively, so they are 
multiplied by the number of elements per tubulin to give single-tubulin 
displacement energy estimates.
The latter two cases result in the largest energy estimates, which 
dominate the collapse time according to Eq. 1 above. Given these single- 
tubulin estimates of the displacement energy that determines collapse 
time, [70] estimate the number of tubulin dimers required to be com -
bined in a coherent collective superposition in order to give collapse 
times on the order of 500 ms — the time scale of the discrete perceptual 
moments we want to account for.
On this basis they estimate that of order 10
9 
tubulins must be in 
superposition collectively to achieve collapse times of order 500 ms. 
Given roughly 10
7 
tubulin per neuron [169] , and assuming 10 % of them 
participate in the collective state, corresponds to a population of about 
1000 neurons. Shorter collapse times would result from larger pop -
ulations in superposition.
The picture sketched above is the original proposal [67,70] . Since 
then, Hameroff and Penrose have raised the possibility that longer 
perceptual moments could emerge as slow “ beat frequencies ” generated 
by the interaction of superposed states that individually have much 
faster, but slightly differing, collapse rates. This model is analyzed in 
[71] .
Thus, although there are likely unknown relevant factors not 
accounted for in these simple calculations, we see that Orch OR provides 
an objective criterion that generates discrete non-overlapping window 
of integration and collapse that correspond directly to cycles of 
perceptual inference in active inference. That means the theory provides 
an objective criterion for the end of a perceptual inference cycle speci -
fied in terms of physical parameters of the system.
In the first paper (conscious active inference I) we reviewed the 
precise mathematical equivalence between conscious active inference 
and the quantum path integral that expresses how probability ampli -
tudes evolve during the time between measurements — measurements 
that we are now understanding as objective reduction (OR) rather than 
merely interacting with some experimenter ’ s apparatus. The DP OR 
collapse criterion determines how long that interval between collapses 
lasts each time based on the current physical state. After the path inte -
gral computes probability amplitudes (beliefs) that optimize the action 
(expected free energy), the state collapse implements the selection of an 
inferred optimal perceptual interpretation and behavior response.
This is the proffered solution to the problem of spontaneously 
occurring, non-overlapping discrete cycles of perceptual inference in 
conscious active inference, under Orch OR.
If the Penrose OR scheme is ruled out by future experiments, there 
are other principled OR theories we can consider [118,128,135,136,62, 
63,89] .
*
How would Orch OR implement the operations in Table 1 of the 
companion paper? Given the quantum MT system able to represent the 
current situation and possible future plans, the quantum path integral 
can be interpreted as performing exact inference with no variational 
approximation nor any need for local gradient descent (previous paper, 
Table 1 row a). The quantum dynamic finds a global optimum. The 
stochasticity is intrinsic quantum indeterminacy (row i). There is no 
need for a mean-field approximation (row e) because the quantum dy -
namic is an indivisible stochastic process. The weighted sums, multi -
plications, and normalization are performed automatically by the 
quantum path integral (rows b, f, g). The linearity of the weighted sums, 
that was problematic for the classical implementation, is intrinsic to 
quantum dynamics under QM or QFT. Model averaging (row d) might be 
included in the path integral as well. Readout (row h) would potentially 
still need to be accomplished by separate downstream neural 
populations.
Recall that we have a rigorous basis for asserting that the quantum 
system can implement these computations. That rigorous basis is the 
mathematical equivalence of conscious active inference and the quantum 
path integral that we established in detail in the prior paper. That is why 
the path integral automatically implements all the requisite 
computations.
If this seems abstract, recall the quantum eye-tracking model that we 
reviewed in the prior paper [17] . It can be understood as a process model 
illustrating concretely how this algorithm could be incorporated into the 
brain. It showed how classical neural activities could sculpt the quantum 
potential governing the evolution of the hypothetical quantum brain 
process through the Schr ¨odinger equation. The Schr ¨odinger equation 
governs the evolution of the wave function representing the probability 
amplitude of making an eye movement to a particular position. In this 
respect it is equivalent to the quantum description of a single particle 
moving in a potential field.
Recall also that the Schr ¨odinger equation is a special case of the 
quantum path integral that is the general formulation of quantum 
physics. That means this model is equivalent to a path integral whose 
probability amplitudes are squared at each discrete time step to repre -
sent the “ measurement ” outcomes, which are optimal next targets for an 
eye-movement. That is why we are presenting it as a process model of 
quantum active inference that takes advantage of the quantum path 
integral.
Lest this equivalence of the Schr ¨odinger equation to the path integral 
formulation be dismissed as a mere metaphor, or loose analogy, we will 
sketch the derivation of the Schr ¨odinger equation for a single parti -
cle — whose position may be interpreted as the current target position for 
an eye movement — from the path integral.
“ In the path integral approach, the evolution of a state is given by the 
transition function K (b, a). [See the prior paper, conscious active 
inference I, for our brief review of the quantum path integral and 
transition function.] From a classical point of view, this can be viewed as 
the analogue of Huygens ’ principle, where the evolution of a wave can 
be determined by assuming that each point along a wave front emits a 
new wave front. The integration over all these infinitesimal wave fronts 
then gives us the overall evolution of the wave front. Mathematically, 
this is given by: ” [85]
ψ (x
j
, t
j
) =
∫
K(x
j
, t
j
; x
i
, t
i
) ⋅ ψ (x
i
, t
i
) ⋅ dx
i                                               
integrated from minus to plus infinity. Here ψ is a wavefunction 
representing the probability amplitude for finding the particle at x at 
time t. Given the non-relativistic classical action in the absence of any 
potential (which is the kinetic energy), 
Table 1 
Problems for a process theory of conscious active inference , and potential 
solutions available to classical and quantum process theories.
Problem Classical process Quantum reduction 
process
a Approximations Gradient, mean field Inference exact, learning 
approx
b Probabilistic 
optimization
Implausible Automatic
c Discrete decision 
moments
Maybe Automatic
d Quantum cognition Maybe Maybe
e Memory capacity Linear in number of 
units
Exponential
f Unity of consciousness Reducible to local 
interactions
Irreducible
g Conscious causation Epiphenomenal Efficacious, 
advantageous
h Encoding/Affect/ 
Valence
Observer-construed, 
functional
Ontological
i Nonalgorithmic 
understand
Implausible Possible
j Subject arrow of time Implausible Automatic
M.C. Wiest and A.S. Puniani                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal 30 (2025) 94–107 
101 
S =
∫
mv
i
2
2
⋅ dt 
the path integral over e
i S 
[85] gives the non-relativistic transition 
function from position (or state) a to state b: 
K ( b , a ) = ( m
/
2 π ( t
b
  t
a
))
1 / 2
⋅ exp (
im ( x
b
  x
a
)
2
2 ( t
b
  t
a
)
) .
Based on this transition function, the time evolution of the wave -
function from t to t + ε is given by:  
To perform the integration, one substitutes d η for dy , where η = y – x , 
and then Taylor expands the left-hand side in terms of t , and the right- 
hand side in terms of η . Since the higher order terms in ε vanish in the 
limit ε → 0, we keep only the linear terms in ε .  
The first term in the integral reduces to ψ ( x, t ), and the linear term in 
η inside the integral goes to zero because it is linear, leaving: 
i
∂ ψ
∂ t
=
  1
2 m
∂
2
ψ
∂ x
2 
which is the Schr ¨odinger equation for a free particle. It is straight -
forward to include a potential in the path integral to derive the 
Schr ¨odinger equation for a particle in a potential, the basis of the 
quantum eye-tracking model we highlighted above.
Thus we see that a system evolving according to the Schr ¨odinger 
equation instantiates the quantum path integral, which we showed in 
the companion paper is mathematically equivalent to temporally-deep 
(i.e., conscious) active inference.
It is critical to appreciate, however, that the path integral computes 
probability amplitudes for outcomes which are not realized until a 
“ measurement ” is made. In the Behera et al. model [17] , these mea -
surements occurred implicitly at each time step upon squaring the 
complex wavefunction to obtain a probability distribution from which to 
select the next actualized (or inferred, under active inference) target 
location. This arbitrary implementation of a “ measurement ” at each 
discrete time step in the quantum eye-tracking model, without any 
collapse mechanism or theory of measurement, is analogous to the 
inference steps added “ by hand, ” without mechanism, at the end of each 
cycle of a theta rhythm in temporally deep classical process models like 
[124,53] .
The mechanism that replaces these ad hoc schemes under our pro -
posal is Orchestrated Objective Reduction (Orch OR) of the collective 
MT state which has been “ programmed ” by the pattern of spiking ac -
tivity across the neural membranes, analogously to the quantum po -
tential in the quantum eye-tracking model [17] . In this way, arbitrarily 
enforced windows of integration and inference are replaced by time 
steps whose duration is determined dynamically by the size of the cur -
rent coherent superposed MT state, according to the objective criterion 
specified in Eq. 1 .
This gives the brain a mechanism for adapting its pre-conscious 
integration time to different behavioral contexts. Contexts requiring 
more frequent inferential updates could be met with recruitment of 
larger neural populations (or a larger fraction of entangled MTs); while 
situations demanding longer integration of sensory evidence to reach a 
reliable inference could be met by isolating smaller coherent pop -
ulations, resulting in longer times until collapse.
Fig. 5 schematically illustrates a biologically plausible way to oper -
ationalize this picture at the cellular level. In Fig. 5 , the neuron outlined 
in red dashes has just fired an action potential, resulting in postsynaptic 
calcium influx (pink cloud) through voltage-gated calcium channels in 
the dendrite ( blue pair ). MTs themselves and MT-associated proteins 
(MAPs) are both functionally sensitive to intracellular calcium [143,18, 
36] , so their state is plausibly modulated by the calcium influx from 
membrane electrical activity in the recent past.
We suggest the metaphor of a guitar, in which the vibrating MTs are 
the strings, the MAPS are frets that constrain allowable frequencies, and 
the calcium is a finger strumming strings. Different arrangements of 
MAPs and different spatial patterns of membrane activity will excite the 
MTs into distinct “ chords ” resonating across the whole MT orchestra, as 
it were. This is how the current neural code may be imprinted onto the 
collective MTs state, so that it represents the current situation and 
possible future plans.
By hypothesis, this state evolves according to the quantum path in -
tegral dynamic until an objective criterion specified in Orch OR is met, 
at which time OR occurs and an updated “ posterior ” conscious percept is 
generated.
As noted above, in order for this new collective state of the intra -
neural MTs to influence behavior, it must be able to react back on the 
membrane voltage. Why? Because our behavior is generated by acti -
vating muscles, which require action potentials in motor neurons. We 
have experimental evidence from the Bandyopadhyay lab (reviewed 
above) directly supporting that MT resonances do in fact control mem -
brane voltage including spiking activity, but how can we envision this 
influence concretely?
Well, another major component of the cytoskeleton are actin poly -
mers, which cooperate with MTs in single-celled organisms to control 
movement [35] . In neurons actin is enriched at synapses, and is 
ψ ( x , t + ε ) =
∫
( m
/
2 π ( t
b
  t
a
))
1 / 2
⋅ exp (
im ( x   y )
2
2 ε
) ⋅ ψ ( y , t ) ⋅ dy 
ψ ( x , t ) + + ε
∂ ψ
∂ t
=
∫
( m
/
2 π ( t
b
  t
a
))
1 / 2
⋅ exp (
im η
2
2 ε
) ⋅ ( ψ ( x , t ) + η
∂ ψ
∂ x
+
1
2
η
2
∂
2
ψ
∂ x
2
+ … ) ⋅ d η 
M.C. Wiest and A.S. Puniani                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal 30 (2025) 94–107 
102 
responsible for the literal movement of dendritic spines (the sites of 
synaptic contacts) in neurons [112,46] and complex regulatory func -
tions in presynaptic terminals [60] . In addition, actin can exist in a 
liquid crystal state [154,166,58] . Liquid crystal materials are used in 
optical computers as programmable logic gates [171,25,26,42,94] . 
Given that MTs have specific arrangements relative to synapses, are 
superradiant and predicted to act as waveguides analogous to nanowires 
in optical computers, it is natural to speculate that the collective MTs 
state may modulate neural activities by modulating synaptic trans -
mission through the interaction of the photon field with 
polarization-sensitive actin at the synapse. In turn the modified light or 
actin itself could modulate synaptic vesicle release machinery in pre -
synaptic terminals.
An advantage of this picture is that it does not violate the Hodgkin- 
Huxley dynamics believed to govern membrane voltage. Rather, the 
spiking activity is modulated via the known “ unreliability ” or “ noisi -
ness ” of synaptic transmission in the central nervous system in partic -
ular. Thus, this cartoon, though speculative, is consistent with known 
neurophysiology in a way that classical models of active inference 
arguably are not.
3.2. Interpretations of quantum theory
As we noted in the previous paper (conscious active inference I, 
Section 4 ), quantum theory relies on the concept of a measurement in 
order to produce meaningful predictions, but provides no definition of 
what physical interaction or process actually constitutes a “ measure -
ment. ” A review of approaches to this measurement problem (MP) may 
be found in [164] .
Approaches to the MP may be broadly classified into so-called “ psi- 
epistemic ” and “ psi-ontic ” interpretations or theories. The former take 
the wavefunction (or quantum state) to partially represent an agent ’ s 
knowledge about the system being measured, while the latter under -
stand the wavefunction to represent an objective physical state. One 
class of psi-epistemic theories is known as Quantum Bayesianism, 
updated to Qbism for short [31,56,57] .
The discontinuous change upon measurement suggests the epistemic 
interpretation, but a range of psi-epistemic views were shown to be 
inconsistent with standard QM by Pusey, Barret, and Rudolph (PBR)
[101,102,138] . In some cases, psi-epistemic theories make empirically 
distinct predictions from standard QM. Experiments aimed at this issue 
have so far supported standard psi-ontic quantum theory and failed to 
support a range of psi-epistemic variations [121,140] .
The PBR theorem assumes there is some ontological part of the 
quantum state even in psi-epistemic theories. Because Qbism is more 
“ radically subjectivist ” than this, it evades the PBR theorem. However, 
Qbism appears to lack standard QP ’ s power to explain basic physical 
phenomena such the solidity of objects and properties like electrical 
conductivity [156,22,73] , so it does not represent a fully developed 
alternative to standard QM. The quantum active inference formalism of 
Fields, Friston et al. is a principled quantum Bayesian theory [44]
developed from standard QM rather than from a speculative epistemic 
revision of standard QM.
However these issues may be resolved, we can say unequivocally that 
our proposal does not work unless OR is true, and epistemic quantum 
theories are false. We have therefore adopted the objective reduction 
(OR) interpretation, which views the wavefunction as an objective 
physical state and its collapse upon measurement as an objective 
physical process. Different theoretical frameworks predict different 
specific dynamics of this physical “ measurement ” process by which 
nature selects actual physical outcomes from its list of possibilities.
3.3. The quantum memory advantage
Aside from accounting for the empirically discrete and irreversible 
nature of the “ stream ” of consciousness, identifying moments of 
experience with Orch OR events also opens up the potential evolu -
tionary advantages of quantum computing. This is because quantum 
computing depends on state collapse to produce useable outputs. 
Although active inference prescribes optimal actions, these actions are 
of course limited by the agent ’ s physical and computational resources 
[103,61] . A quantum substrate embodying Orch OR represents huge 
potential advantages over a classical brain — quantum computational 
advantages including quantum associative memory advantages [146, 
163,32] — while at the same time accounting for how that complex 
physical state distributed across the cortex could correspond to a unified 
experience [168] .
In particular, combining Grover ’ s quantum search algorithm with a 
neural network architecture leads to polynomial or even exponential 
increase in memory capacity as compared to classical neural network 
models of associative memory [1,10,144 – 146,157,158,163,172,32] . 
The quantum memory outperforms its classical counterpart because it 
eliminates the interference, aka cross-talk, among different memory 
patterns that plagues classical associative memory networks [32] .
This is a significant issue for neuroscience. Although human memory 
is known to be highly fallible and subject to confabulation, especially in 
a courtroom context [100] , controlled experimental testing has estab -
lished that humans have immense memory capacity [153,20] . More -
over, contrary to the general assumption that our memories are highly 
compressed abstract representations, [20] specifically showed that our 
“ massive ” capacity for images comprises sensory details , not just com -
pressed abstract semantic representations.
The challenge for classical neuroscience is that capacity in classical 
neural network models of associative memory like the Hopfield model 
grows only linearly or sublinearly with the number of neural units [117] . 
Consistent with the Orch OR account, the cytoskeleton does play a major 
role in memory [27] . It virtually goes without saying that memory ca -
pacity is one of the inescapable constraints that active inference must 
operate under [103,110] . Presumably biological agents like humans 
store episodic memories in order to use them to make more adaptive 
decisions in the future.
In the previous paper (conscious active inference I, Section 3 ), we 
noted that humans maintain implicit memories of at least 35 syllables 
during speech perception [41] . Consistency requires us to face the fact 
that we are actually maintaining specific episodes in memory for de -
cades, because of their potential utility in making future real-time 
judgments and choices — in a single “ moment. ” We believe it is fair to 
say that no model — classical or quantum — has yet described how 
humans can efficiently interface with this “ massive ” memory [20] so as 
to make decisions in a single “ trial, ” informed by a lifetime of 
experience.
But again, classical memory models are limited to order N memories 
in a network of N neural units. For example, a classical network of 
N = 100 neurons might only reliably store 15 memory patterns, and this 
grows to only 150 memories for N = 1000 neurons. In contrast, in 
quantum associative memory models the capacity grows as a power of 
N, or even exponentially [1,10,144 – 146,157,158,163,172,32] . We 
suggest that the model with the greater memory capacity has the 
advantage for explaining our amazing ability to base momentary de -
cisions on remembered individual episodes accumulated over decades.
4. Summary and outlook: testing and refining the quantum 
active inference model
4.1. Summary
We have argued that realistic classical neural models of predictive 
processing have failed to establish their biological plausibility, because 
the required addition and multiplication operations appear to take too 
long for real-time inference, especially relying on relatively slow and 
unstable classical attractor mechanisms. For classical stochastic models 
the required number of samples appears too large to be carried out 
M.C. Wiest and A.S. Puniani                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal 30 (2025) 94–107 
103 
quickly enough by realistic numbers of classical conductance-based 
spiking neurons.
This motivated us to consider an alternative quantum implementa -
tion, Orchestrated Objective Reduction (Orch OR) of a collective intra -
neuronal state of microtubules (MTs). We reviewed direct biophysical 
evidence of a consciousness-related macroscopic quantum state in the 
human brain, as well as experimental demonstration of room- 
temperature quantum optical behavior of MTs, and that MT reso -
nances control membrane voltage and neural spiking activity in living 
neurons. Evidence that volatile anesthetics target MTs to cause uncon -
sciousness further supports the Orch OR picture.
Table 1 presents a comparison of the classical and quantum process 
theories in terms of specific implementation issues and other theoretical 
issues. Row b ( shaded orange ), regarding the plausibility of classical 
mechanistic accounts of probabilistic processing and active inference, 
was the primary focus of the previous article. The white rows indicate 
issues that we discussed more briefly. The rows shaded in grey indicate 
issues that we only touched on, but which we note here for complete -
ness. The issue of the unity of consciousness (row f) and the problem of 
evolutionary epiphenomenalism (row g) are discussed in more depth in 
[168] . The problem of phenomenal affect (row h), aka hedonic value, is 
addressed from a quantum perspective in [68] , and from an active 
inference perspective in [84] .
Given its falsifiability, its theoretical and experimental support, and 
its ability to account for the unity and evolutionary relevance of con -
sciousness among other merits summarized in Table 1 , we conclude that 
Orch OR is the leading candidate for a fundamental theory of con -
sciousness and sentient active inference. Recognizing MTs as the sub -
strate of consciousness also naturally accounts for the remarkable 
“ continuity between life and consciousness ” noted by many authors 
[148] , since MTs underlie integration and coordination functions in 
evolutionarily ancient single-celled organisms lacking neurons.
4.2. Outlook
The functional importance of quantum entanglement in conscious 
agents has been derived from within the active inference formalism itself 
[44] , so we expect more serious investigation of the role of quantum 
physics in biology and consciousness. The Orch OR hypothesis, defended 
here, that consciousness is a property of the quantum collapse of a 
collective state of intraneuronal microtubules, can be further tested by 
in-vivo brain spectroscopy experiments [120] . That is, MT-related peaks 
in the brains of waking insects or mammals should be dampened or 
otherwise altered under anesthesia [29] . These experiments will likely 
prove technically challenging because the signal must be detected in a 
large background. Variations of the quantum MRI approach of Kerskens 
and Perez may provide alternative routes for experimentally testing the 
theory. Another avenue is suggested by [64] , who predict characteristic 
“ scatter ” or noise around sinusoidal membrane potential oscillations, 
that should quantify the “ quantum-like ” noise in the neuron ’ s mem -
brane potential fluctuations.
The present proposal of course leaves many unanswered questions 
for future work. Orch OR may provide for exact inference for perception 
and real-time motor control, while still making use of Hebbian-like 
classical gradient-descent plasticity rules for approximately optimal 
learning over longer time scales ( Table 1 row a). Future work aimed at 
reconciling active inference with the quantum cognition literature may 
be liberated from the bias that the neural implementation must be a 
classical dynamical system [66] . There are questions about how the 
brain may modulate the rate of Orch OR collapse events based on the 
“ urgency ” of the current situation, and there is the fundamental question 
of how specific experiences are encoded in the collective MT state. This 
latter question may not be as daunting as it appears. Due to the wide -
spread presence of voltage-gated calcium channels in cortical dendrites, 
the spatiotemporal pattern of spiking activity on the neural membranes 
is mirrored in the intracellular calcium concentration, which likely 
imprints this pattern into the collective MT vibrational state. Thus, much 
of what we have already learned about the neural code will likely 
translate in a straightforward way to the MT code .
If and when the field achieves a consensus that the brain basis of 
conscious active inference is quantum physical in nature, we will have 
entered a new epoch in our understanding of ourselves as conscious 
beings in a physical universe. The outlook is: exciting.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Michael C. Wiest: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original 
draft, Supervision, Investigation, Conceptualization. Arjan Singh 
Puniani: Writing – review & editing, Investigation.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Nadia Blackshaw (Philosophy Department, Lon -
don School of Economics) for helpful suggestions on a previous version 
of this paper.
References
[1] Adler SL. Why decoherence has not solved the measurement problem: a response 
to P.W. Anderson. Stud Hist Philos Modern Phys 2003;34b:135 – 42 .
[2] Akhmanova A, Kapitein LC. Mechanisms of microtubule organization in 
differentiated animal cells. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2022;23:541 – 58 .
[3] Alamia A, VanRullen R. Alpha oscillations and traveling waves: signatures of 
predictive coding? PLoS Biol 2019;17:e3000487 .
[4] Albrecht-Buehler G. Surface extensions of 3T3 cells towards distant infrared light 
sources. J Cell Biol 1991;114:493 – 502 .
[5] Albrecht-Buehler G. Rudimentary form of cellular "vision". Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA 1992;89:8288 – 92 .
[6] Albrecht-Buehler G. Cellular infrared detector appears to be contained in the 
centrosome. Cell Motil Cytoskelet 1994;27:262 – 71 .
[7] Albrecht-Buehler G. Changes of cell behavior by near-infrared signals. Cell Motil 
Cytoskelet 1995;32:299 – 304 .
[8] Allen C, Stevens CF. An evaluation of causes for unreliability of synaptic 
transmission. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994;91:10380 – 3 .
[9] Alonso A, Klink R. Differential electroresponsiveness of stellate and pyramidal- 
like cells of medial entorhinal cortex layer II. J Neurophysiol 1993;70:128 – 43 .
[10] Andrecut M, Ali MK. Quantum associative memory. Int J Mod Phys B 2003;17: 
2447 – 72 .
[11] Arnold DH, Clifford CW, Wenderoth P. Asynchronous processing in vision: color 
leads motion. Curr Biol 2001;11:596 – 600 .
[12] Babcock NS, Montes-Cabrera G, Oberhofer KE, Chergui M, Celardo GL, Kurian P. 
Ultraviolet superradiance from mega-networks of tryptophan in biological 
architectures. J Phys Chem B 2024;128:4035 – 46 .
[13] Baker PF, Shaw TI, Hodgkin AL. Replacement of protoplasm of a giant nerve fibre 
with artificial solutions. Nature 1961;190:885 (- + ) .
[14] Baker PF, Hodgkin AL, Shaw TI. Perfusion of giant nerve fibres of loligo. 
J PhysiolLond 1961;157. P25- & .
[15] Baker PF, Shaw TI, Hodgkin AL. Effects of changes in internal ionic 
concentrations on electrical properties of perfused giant axons. J Physiol Lond 
1962;164:355 (- + ) .
[16] Baker PF, Shaw TI, Hodgkin AL. Replacement of axoplasm of giant nerve fibres 
with artificial solutions. J Physiol Lond 1962;164:330 (- + ) .
[17] Behera L, Kar I, Elitzur A. A recurrent quantum neural network model to describe 
eye tracking of moving targets. Found Phys Lett 2005;18:357 – 70 .
[18] Bender PK, Rebhun LI. The calcium sensitivity of Map-2 and Tau-Microtubules in 
the presence of calmodulin. Ann NY Acad Sci 1986;466:392 – 409 .
[19] Borst JGG. The low synaptic release probability. Trends Neurosci 2010;33: 
259 – 66 .
[20] Brady TF, Konkle T, Alvarez GA, Oliva A. Visual long-term memory has a massive 
storage capacity for object details. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008;105:14325 – 9 .
[21] Branco T, Staras K. PERSPECTIVES the probability of neurotransmitter release: 
variability and feedback control at single synapses. Nat Rev Neurosci 2009;10: 
373 – 83 .
[22] Brown H. The reality of the wavefunction: old arguments and new. In: Cordero A, 
editor. Philosophers Look at Quantum Mechanics. Springer Nature; 2019. 
p. 63 – 86 .
[23] Buesing L, Bill J, Nessler B, Maass W. Neural dynamics as sampling: a model for 
stochastic computation in recurrent networks of spiking neurons. PLoS Comput 
Biol 2011;7:e1002211 .
M.C. Wiest and A.S. Puniani                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal 30 (2025) 94–107 
104 
[24] Chiu W, Nanopoulos D, Brinkley WR. Biophysics of microtubules. J Struct Biol 
1997;118. 83-83 .
[25] Collins DR, Sampsell JB, Hornbeck LJ, Florence JM, Penz PA, Gately MT. 
Deformable mirror device spatial light modulators and their applicability to 
optical neural networks. Appl Opt 1989;28:4900 – 7 .
[26] Collins S. Application of Liquid Crystals to Optical Logic Gates. SPIE; 1989 .
[27] Craddock TJ, Tuszynski JA, Hameroff S. Cytoskeletal signaling: is memory 
encoded in microtubule lattices by CaMKII phosphorylation? PLoS Comput Biol 
2012;8:e1002421 .
[28] Craddock TJ, Hameroff SR, Ayoub AT, Klobukowski M, Tuszynski JA. Anesthetics 
act in quantum channels in brain microtubules to prevent consciousness. Curr 
Top Med Chem 2015;15:523 – 33 .
[29] Craddock TJA, Kurian P, Preto J, Sahu K, Hameroff SR, Klobukowski M, 
Tuszynski JA. Anesthetic alterations of collective terahertz oscillations in tubulin 
correlate with clinical potency: implications for anesthetic action and Post- 
Operative cognitive dysfunction. Sci Rep 2017;7:9877 .
[30] Crick F, Koch C. A framework for consciousness. Nat Neurosci 2003;6:119 – 26 .
[31] DeBrota JB, Fuchs CA, Pienaar JL, Stacey BC. Born ’ s rule as a quantum extension 
of Bayesian coherence. Phys Rev A 2021;104 .
[32] Diamantini MC, Trugenberger CA. High-capacity quantum associative memories. 
J Appl Math Phys 4 2016:2079 – 112 .
[33] Diosi L. A universal master equation for the gravitational violation of quantum- 
mechanics. Phys Lett A 1987;120:377 – 81 .
[34] Diosi L. Models for universal reduction of macroscopic quantum fluctuations. 
Phys Rev A 1989;40:1165 – 74 .
[35] Dominguez R, Holmes KC. Actin structure and function. Annu Rev Biophys 2011; 
40:169 – 86 .
[36] Donato R. Calcium-Sensitivity of brain microtubule proteins in the presence of S- 
100 proteins. Cell Calcium 1985;6:343 – 61 .
[37] Eagleman DM, Sejnowski TJ. Motion integration and postdiction in visual 
awareness. Science 2000;287:2036 – 8 .
[38] Eagleman DM, Sejnowski TJ. Motion signals bias localization judgments: a 
unified explanation for the flash-lag, flash-drag, flash-jump, and frohlich 
illusions. J Vis 2007;7(3). https://doi.org/10.1167/1167.1164.1163 .
[39] Eger 2nd EI, Raines DE, Shafer SL, Hemmings Jr HC, Sonner JM. Is a new 
paradigm needed to explain how inhaled anesthetics produce immobility? Anesth 
Analg 2008;107:832 – 48 .
[40] Emerson DJ, Weiser BP, Psonis J, Liao Z, Taratula O, Fiamengo A, Wang X, 
Sugasawa K, Smith AB, 3rd, Eckenhoff RG, Dmochowski IJ. Direct modulation of 
microtubule stability contributes to anthracene general anesthesia. J Am Chem 
Soc 2013;135:5389 – 98 .
[41] Falandays JB, Brown-Schmidt S, Toscano JC. Long-lasting gradient activation of 
referents during spoken language processing. ISSN 0749-596x DOI ARTN J Mem 
Lang 2020;112:104088. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2020.104088 .
[42] Fatehi MT, Wasmundt KC, Collins SA. Optical logic gates using Liquid-Crystal 
light valve - implementation and application example. Appl Opt 1981;20:2250 – 6 .
[43] Fekete T, Van de Cruys S, Ekroll V, van Leeuwen C. In the interest of saving time: 
a critique of discrete perception. Neurosci Conscious 2018;2018:niy003 .
[44] Fields C, Friston K, Glazebrook JF, Levin M. A free energy principle for generic 
quantum systems. Prog Biophys Mol Bio 2022;173:36 – 59 .
[45] Fisch K, Schwalger T, Lindner B, Herz AV, Benda J. Channel noise from both slow 
adaptation currents and fast currents is required to explain spike-response 
variability in a sensory neuron. J Neurosci 2012;32:17332 – 44 .
[46] Fischer M, Kaech S, Knutti D, Matus A. Rapid actin-based plasticity in dendritic 
spines. Neuron 1998;20:847 – 54 .
[47] Fleming S, Michel M. Sensory horizons and the functions of conscious vision. 
Behav Brain Sci Forthcom 2025 .
[48] Franks NP, Lieb WR. Do General-Anesthetics act by Competitive-Binding to 
specific receptors. Nature 1984;310:599 – 601 .
[49] Freeman WJ. Origin, structure, and role of background EEG activity. Part 1. 
Analytic amplitude. Clin Neurophysiol 2004;115:2077 – 88 .
[50] Freeman WJ. Origin, structure, and role of background EEG activity. Part 2. 
Analytic phase. Clin Neurophysiol 2004;115:2089 – 107 .
[51] Freeman WJ. A cinematographic hypothesis of cortical dynamics in perception. 
Int J Psychophysiol 2006;60:149 – 61 .
[52] Friston K, Herreros I. Active inference and learning in the cerebellum. Neural 
Comput 2016;28:1812 – 39 .
[53] Friston K, FitzGerald T, Rigoli F, Schwartenbeck P, Pezzulo G. Active inference: a 
process theory. Neural Comput 2017;29:1 – 49 .
[54] Friston KJ. Waves of prediction. PLoS Biol 2019;17:e3000426 .
[55] Friston KJ, Mattout J, Kilner J. Action understanding and active inference. Biol 
Cyber 2011;104:137 – 60 .
[56] Fuchs CA, Schack R. A Quantum-Bayesian route to Quantum-State space. Found 
Phys 2011;41:345 – 56 .
[57] Fuchs CA, Schack R. Quantum-Bayesian coherence. Rev Mod Phys 2013;85 .
[58] Furukawa R, Kundra R, Fechheimer M. Formation of Liquid-Crystals from Actin- 
Filaments. BiochemUs 1993;32:12346 – 52 .
[59] Futterer CD, Maurer MH, Schmitt A, Feldmann Jr RE, Kuschinsky W, Waschke KF. 
Alterations in rat brain proteins after desflurane anesthesia. Anesthesiology 2004; 
100:302 – 8 .
[60] Gentile JE, Carrizales MG, Koleske AJ. Control of synapse structure and function 
by actin and its regulators. CellsBasel 2022;11 .
[61] Gershman SJ, Horvitz EJ, Tenenbaum JB. Computational rationality: a 
converging paradigm for intelligence in brains, minds, and machines. Science 
2015;349:273 – 8 .
[62] Ghirardi G, Grassi R, Rimini A. Continuous-Spontaneous-Reduction model 
involving gravity. Phys Rev A 1990;42:1057 – 65 .
[63] Ghirardi GC, Rimini A, Weber T. Unified dynamics for microscopic and 
macroscopic systems. Phys Rev D 1986;34:470 – 91 .
[64] Ghose P, Pinotsis DA. The FitzHugh-Nagumo equations and quantum noise. 
Comput Struct Biotechnol 2025;30:12 – 20 .
[65] Ghosh S, Singh P, Manna J, Saxena K, Sahoo P, Krishnanda SD, Ray K, Hill JP, 
Bandyopadhyay A. The century-old picture of a nerve spike is wrong: filaments 
fire, before membrane. Commun Integr Biol 2022;15:115 – 20 .
[66] Gunji Y.P., Shinohara S., Basios V. (2022) Connecting the free energy principle 
with quantum cognition. Front Neurorobotics 16. ISSN 1662-5218 DOI ARTN 
910161 10.3389/fnbot.2022.910161 .
[67] Hagan S, Hameroff SR, Tuszynski JA. Quantum computation in brain 
microtubules: decoherence and biological feasibility. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlinear 
Soft Matter Phys 2002;65:061901 .
[68] Hameroff S. The Quantum Origin of Life: How The Brain Evolved To Feel Good in: 
On Human Nature. Elsevier; 2017. p. 333 – 53 .
[69] Hameroff S. Orch OR ’ is the most complete, and most easily falsifiable theory of 
consciousness. Cogn Neurosci 2021;12:74 – 6 .
[70] Hameroff S, Penrose R. Orchestrated reduction of quantum coherence in brain 
microtubules: a model for consciousness. Math Comput Simula 1996;40:453 – 80 .
[71] Hameroff S, Penrose R. Consciousness in the universe: a review of the ’ orch OR ’ 
theory. Phys Life Rev 2014;11:39 – 78 .
[72] Hameroff SR. Anesthetic action and "quantum consciousness": a match made in 
olive oil. Anesthesiology 2018;129:228 – 31 .
[73] Healey R. (2023) Quantum-Bayesian and Pragmatist Views of Quantum Theory. 
In: The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2023 Edition) (Zalta E, 
Nodelman, U, ed).
[74] Hemmings Jr HC, Riegelhaupt PM, Kelz MB, Solt K, Eckenhoff RG, Orser BA, 
Goldstein PA. Towards a comprehensive understanding of anesthetic mechanisms 
of action: a decade of discovery. Trends Pharmacol Sci 2019;40:464 – 81 .
[75] Herring BE, Xie Z, Marks J, Fox AP. Isoflurane inhibits the neurotransmitter 
release machinery. J Neurophysiol 2009;102:1265 – 73 .
[76] Hodgkin AL, Huxley AF. The dual effect of membrane potential on sodium 
conductance in the giant axon of loligo. J Physiol Lond 1952;116:497 – 506 .
[77] Hodgkin AL, Huxley AF. A quantitative description of membrane current and its 
application to conduction and excitation in nerve. J Physiol Lond 1952;117: 
500 – 44 .
[78] Hodgkin AL, Huxley AF. The components of membrane conductance in the giant 
axon of loligo. J Physiol Lond 1952;116:473 – 96 .
[79] Hodgkin AL, Huxley AF. Currents carried by sodium and potassium ions through 
the membrane of the giant axon of loligo. J Physiol Lond 1952;116:449 – 72 .
[80] Hodgkin AL, Huxley AF, Katz B. Measurement of Current-Voltage relations in the 
membrane of the giant axon of loligo. J Physiol Lond 1952;116:424 – 48 .
[81] Hohwy J. The Predictive Mind. Oxford University Press; 2013 .
[82] Huang EP, Stevens CF. Estimating the distribution of synaptic reliabilities. 
J Neurophysiol 1997;78:2870 – 80 .
[83] James W. (1890) The principles of psychology. New York: H. Holt.
[84] Joffily M, Coricelli G. Emotional valence and the Free-Energy principle. ISSN 
1553-734x DOI ARTN Plos Comput Biol 2013;9(6):e1003094. https://doi.org/ 
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003094 .
[85] Kaku M. Quantum Field Theory a Modern Introduction. New York: Oxford 
University Press; 1993 .
[86] Kalenka A, Hinkelbein J, Feldmann Jr RE, Kuschinsky W, Waschke KF, 
Maurer MH. The effects of sevoflurane anesthesia on rat brain proteins: a 
proteomic time-course analysis. Anesth Analg 2007;104:1129 – 35 (tables of 
contents) .
[87] Kalra AP, Benny A, Travis SM, Zizzi EA, Morales-Sanchez A, Oblinsky DG, 
Craddock TJA, Hameroff SR, MacIver MB, Tuszynski JA, Petry S, Penrose R, 
Scholes GD. Electronic energy migration in microtubules. ACS Cent Sci 2023;9: 
352 – 61 .
[88] Kapitein LC, Hoogenraad CC. Building the neuronal microtubule cytoskeleton. 
Neuron 2015;87:492 – 506 .
[89] Karolyhazy F. Gravitation and quantum mechanics of macroscopic objects. Nuovo 
Cim A 1966;42:390 (- + ) .
[90] Katz Y. Anesthesia and the Meyer-Overton rule. I. potencies and perturbations. 
J Theor Biol 1994;167:93 – 7 .
[91] Kay K, Chung JE, Sosa M, Schor JS, Karlsson MP, Larkin MC, Liu DF, Frank LM. 
Constant Sub-second cycling between representations of possible futures in the 
hippocampus. Cell 2020;180:552 (- + ) .
[92] Kelz MB, Mashour GA. The biology of general anesthesia from paramecium to 
primate. Curr Biol 2019;29:R1199 – 210 .
[93] Kerskens CM, P ´erez DL. Experimental indications of non-classical brain functions. 
J Phys Commun 2022;6:1 – 11 .
[94] Khan AH, Nejib UR. Optical logic gates employing Liquid-Crystal optical 
switches. Appl Opt 1987;26:270 – 3 .
[95] Khan S, Huang Y, Timucin D, Bailey S, Lee S, Lopes J, Gaunce E, Mosberger J, 
Zhan M, Abdelrahman B, Zeng X, Wiest MC. Microtubule-stabilizer epothilone b 
delays anesthetic-induced unconsciousness in rats. eNeuro 2024;11:1 – 12 .
[96] Kim J. Mind in a Physical World: An Essay On The Mind-body Problem And 
Mental Causation Cambridge. The MIT Press; 1998 .
[97] Kim JH, Aghaeimeibodi S, Richardson CJK, Leavitt RP, Waks E. Super-Radiant 
emission from quantum dots in a nanophotonic waveguide. Nano Lett 2018;18: 
4734 – 40 .
[98] Kolers PA, Grunau MV. Shape and color in apparent motion. Vis Res 1976;16: 
329 – 35 .
M.C. Wiest and A.S. Puniani                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal 30 (2025) 94–107 
105 
[99] Kozma R, Freeman WJ. Cinematic operation of the cerebral cortex interpreted via 
critical transitions in Self-Organized dynamic systems. Front Syst Neurosci 2017; 
11. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnsys.2017.00010:10 .
[100] Lacy JW, Stark CEL. The neuroscience of memory: implications for the courtroom. 
Nat Rev Neurosci 2013;14:649 – 58 .
[101] Leifer MS. Is the quantum state real? An extended review of psi-ontology 
theorems. Quanta 2014;3:67 – 155 .
[102] Leifer MS. Psi-Epistemic models are exponentially bad at explaining the 
distinguishability of quantum states. Phys Rev Lett 2014;112 .
[103] Lewis RL, Howes A, Singh S. Computational rationality: linking mechanism and 
behavior through bounded utility maximization. Top Cogn Sci 2014;6:279 – 311 .
[104] Li N, Lu D, Yang L, Tao H, Xu Y, Wang C, Fu L, Liu H, Chummum Y, Zhang S. 
Nuclear spin attenuates the anesthetic potency of xenon isotopes in mice: 
implications for the mechanisms of anesthesia and consciousness. Anesthesiology 
2018;129:271 – 7 .
[105] Li N, You ZR, Ren Y, Kim HH, Yang JS, Li G, Doheny JT, Ding WH, Xia SY, 
Wang SY, Zhou X, Wu XB, Shen SQ, Dong YL, Xie ZC, Chen L, Mao JR, 
Martyn JAJ. Microtubule-modulating drugs alter sensitivity to isoflurane in mice. 
BMC Anesth 2025;25 .
[106] Libet B. Cortical activation in conscious and unconscious experience. Perspect 
Biol Med 1965;9:77 (- + ) .
[107] Libet B. The timing of brain events: reply to the "special section" in this journal of 
September 2004, edited by susan pockett. Conscious Cogn 2006;15:540 – 7 .
[108] Libet B, Wright EW, Feinstein B, Pearl DK. Subjective referral of the timing for a 
conscious sensory experience - functional-role for the somatosensory specific 
projection system in man. Brain 1979;102:193 – 224 .
[109] Libet B, Delattre LD, Levin G, Alberts WW, Feinstein B, Wright EW. Production of 
threshold levels of conscious sensation by electrical stimulation of human 
somatosensory cortex. J Neurophysiol 1964;27(4):546. https://doi.org/10.1152/ 
jn.1964.27.4.546 .
[110] Lieder F, Griffiths TL. Resource-rational analysis: understanding human cognition 
as the optimal use of limited computational resources. Behav Brain Sci 2020;43 .
[111] Linganna RE, Levy WJ, Dmochowski IJ, Eckenhoff RG, Speck RM. Taxane 
modulation of anesthetic sensitivity in surgery for nonmetastatic breast cancer. 
J Clin Anesth 2015;27:481 – 5 .
[112] Ludin B, Kaech S, Fischer M, Matus A. Visualization of rapid actin-based dynamics 
in dendritic spines. Mol Biol Cell 1998;9. 226a-226a .
[113] Macknik SL, Livingstone MS. Neuronal correlates of visibility and invisibility in 
the primate visual system. Nat Neurosci 1998;1:144 – 9 .
[114] MacKnik SL, Martinez-Conde S. The role of monocular and binocular cells of the 
early visual system in the processing of visibility and invisibility. Invest 
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2000;41. S732-S732 .
[115] Macknik SL, Martinez-Conde S. The dichoptic standing wave of invisibility: 
implications for awareness and models of visual masking that require feedback or 
cortical circuits. Perception 2003;32. 49-49 .
[116] Mashour GA. Anesthesia and the neurobiology of consciousness. Neuron 2024; 
112:1553 – 67 .
[117] McEliece RJ, Posner EC, Rodemich ER, Venkatesh SS. The capacity of the hopfield 
associative memory. IEEE Trans Inf Theory 1987;33:461 – 82 .
[118] Moroz IM, Penrose R, Tod P. Spherically-symmetric solutions of the Schrodinger- 
Newton equations. Class Quant Grav 1998;15:2733 – 42 .
[119] Motlagh SC, Joanisse M, Wang BY, Mohsenzadeh Y. Unveiling the neural 
dynamics of conscious perception in rapid object recognition. ISSN 1053-8119 
DOI ARTN Neuroimage 2024;296:120668. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
neuroimage.2024.120668 .
[120] Movasaghi Z, Rehman S, Rehman IU. Raman spectroscopy of biological tissues. 
Appl Spectrosc Rev 2007;42:493 – 541 .
[121] Nigg D, Monz T, Schindler P, Martinez EA, Hennrich M, Blatt R, Pusey MF, 
Rudolph T, Barrett J. Can different quantum state vectors correspond to the same 
physical state? An experimental test. New J Phys 2016:18 .
[122] Nishita M, Satake T, Minami Y, Suzuki A. Regulatory mechanisms and cellular 
functions of non-centrosomal microtubules. J Biochem 2017;162:1 – 10 .
[123] Pan JZ, Xi J, Eckenhoff MF, Eckenhoff RG. Inhaled anesthetics elicit region- 
specific changes in protein expression in mammalian brain. Proteomics 2008;8: 
2983 – 92 .
[124] Parr T, Friston KJ. The discrete and continuous brain: from decisions to 
movement-and back again. Neural Comput 2018;30:2319 – 47 .
[125] Parr T, Friston K, Pezzulo G. Generative models for sequential dynamics in active 
inference. Cogn Neurodyn 2024;18:3259 – 72 .
[126] Parr T, Oswal A, Manohar SG. Inferring when to move. Neurosci Biobehav Review 
2025;169 .
[127] Parr T, Pezzulo G, Friston KJ. Active Inference the free energy principle in mind, 
brain, and behavior. MIT Press 2022 .
[128] Pearle P. Combining stochastic dynamical State-Vector reduction with 
spontaneous localization. Phys Rev A 1989;39:2277 – 89 .
[129] Penrose R. The Emperor ’ s New Mind: Concerning Computers, Minds, and The 
Laws of Physics Oxford. Oxford University Press; 1989 .
[130] Penrose R. Shadows of the Mind: A Search for the Missing Science of 
Consciousness. Oxford University Press; 1994 .
[131] Penrose R. On gravity ’ s role in quantum state reduction. Gen Relat Gravit 1996; 
28:581 – 600 .
[132] Penrose R. Black holes, quantum theory and cosmology. J Phys Conf Ser 2009; 
174 .
[133] Penrose R. On the gravitization of quantum mechanics 1: quantum state 
reduction. Found Phys 2014;44:557 – 75 .
[134] Penrose R, Hameroff S. Gaps? What gaps? Reply to grush and churchland. 
J Conscious Stud 1995;2:98 .
[135] Percival IC. Primary state diffusion. Proc Roy Soc Math Phys Sci 1994;447: 
189 – 209 .
[136] Percival IC. Quantum spacetime fluctuations and primary state diffusion. Proc 
Roy Soc Math Phys Sci 1995;451:503 – 13 .
[137] P ´erez DL, Bokde ALW, Kerskens CM. Complexity analysis of heartbeat-related 
signals in brain MRI time series as a potential biomarker for ageing and cognitive 
performance. Eur Phys J Spec Top 2023;232:123 – 33 .
[138] Pusey MF, Barrett J, Rudolph T. On the reality of the quantum state. Nat Phys 
2012;8:475 – 8 .
[139] Rabinovich M, Bick C, Varona P. Beyond neurons and spikes: cognon, the 
hierarchical dynamical unit of thought. Cogn Neurodyn 2024;18:3327 – 35 .
[140] Ringbauer M, Duffus B, Branciard C, Cavalcanti EG, White AG, Fedrizzi A. 
Measurements on the reality of the wavefunction. Nat Phys 2015;11:249 – 54 .
[141] Saxena K, Singh P, Sahoo P, Sahu S, Ghosh S, Ray K, Fujita D, Bandyopadhyay A. 
Fractal, scale free electromagnetic resonance of a single brain extracted 
microtubule nanowire, a single tubulin protein and a single neuron. Fractal Fract 
2020;4:1 – 16 .
[142] Scharnowski F, Ruter J, Jolij J, Hermens F, Kammer T, Herzog MH. Long-lasting 
modulation of feature integration by transcranial magnetic stimulation. J Vis 
2009;9(1):1 – 10 .
[143] Schliwa M, Euteneuer U, Bulinski JC, Izant JG. Calcium lability of cytoplasmic 
microtubules and its modulation by microtubule-associated proteins. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci Biol 1981;78:1037 – 41 .
[144] Schuld M, Sinayskiy I, Petruccione F. The quest for a quantum neural network. 
Quantum Inf Process 2014;13:2567 – 86 .
[145] Schuld M, Sinayskiy I, Petruccione F. Quantum walks on graphs representing the 
firing patterns of a quantum neural network. ISSN 1050-2947 DOI ARTN Phys 
Rev A 2014;89(3):032333. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.89.032333 .
[146] Schuld M, Petruccione F. Supervised Learning With Quantum Computers. 
Springer; 2018 .
[147] Schurger A, Sitt JD, Dehaene S. An accumulator model for spontaneous neural 
activity prior to self-initiated movement. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2012;109: 
E2904 – 13 .
[148] Seth A. Conscious artificial intelligence and biological naturalism. Behav Brain Sci 
2025:1 – 42 .
[149] Singh P, Saxena K, Sahoo P, Ghosh S, Bandyopadhyay A. Electrophysiology using 
coaxial atom probe array: live imaging reveals hidden circuits of a hippocampal 
neural network. J Neurophysiol 2021;125:2107 – 16 .
[150] Singh P, Sahoo P, Saxena K, Manna JS, Ray K, Ghosh S, Bandyopadhyay A. 
Cytoskeletal filaments deep inside a neuron are not silent: they regulate the 
precise timing of nerve spikes using a pair of vortices. Symmetry Basel 2021;13: 
1 – 14 .
[151] Solano P, Barberis-Blostein P, Fatemi FK, Orozco LA, Rolston SL. Super-radiance 
reveals infinite-range dipole interactions through a nanofiber. Nat Commun 2017; 
8:1857 .
[152] Sonner JM, Werner DF, Elsen FP, Xing Y, Liao M, Harris RA, Harrison NL, 
Fanselow MS, Eger EI, 2nd, Homanics GE. Effect of isoflurane and other potent 
inhaled anesthetics on minimum alveolar concentration, learning, and the 
righting reflex in mice engineered to express alpha1 gamma-aminobutyric acid 
type a receptors unresponsive to isoflurane. Anesthesiology 2007;106:107 – 13 .
[153] Standing L. Learning 10,000 pictures. Q J Exp Psychol 1973;25:207 – 22 .
[154] Suzuki A, Maeda T, Ito T. Formation of liquid-crystalline phase of actin filament 
solutions and its dependence on filament length as studied by optical 
birefringence. Biophys J 1991;59:25 – 30 .
[155] Tegmark M. Importance of quantum decoherence in brain processes. Phys Rev E 
Stat Phys Plasmas Fluids Relat Inter Top 2000;61:4194 – 206 .
[156] Timpson C. Quantum bayesianism: a study. Stud Hist Philos M P 2008;39: 
579 – 609 .
[157] Trugenberger CA. Probabilistic quantum memories. ISSN 0031-9007 DOI ARTN 
Phys Rev Lett 2001;87(6):067901. https://doi.org/10.1103/ 
PhysRevLett.87.067901 .
[158] Trugenberger CA. Quantum pattern recognition. Quantum Inf Process 2002;1: 
471 – 93 .
[159] VanRullen R. Perceptual cycles. Trends Cogn Sci 2016;20:723 – 35 .
[160] VanRullen R, Koch C. Is perception discrete or continuous? Trends Cogn Sci 2003; 
7:207 – 13 .
[161] Vasiliev JM, Samoylov VI. Regulatory functions of microtubules. BiochemMosc 
2013;78:37 – 40 .
[162] Vasilyeva NA, Pivovarov AS. Motor proteins of microtubules and mechanisms of 
synaptic plasticity. Zh Vyss Nerv Deiat Im I P Pavlov 2016;66:148 – 62 .
[163] Ventura D, Martinez T. Quantum associative memory. Inf Sci 2000;124:273 – 96 .
M.C. Wiest and A.S. Puniani                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal 30 (2025) 94–107 
106 
[164] Wallace D. 2008. The Quantum Measurement Problem: State of Play. arXiv:quant- 
ph.
[165] Warren WS. Comment on: ’experimental indications of non-classical brain 
function’ 2022 6 105001. J Phys Commun 2023;7:1–4 .
[166] Weirich KL, Dasbiswas K, Banerjee S, Witten TA, Vaikuntanathan S, Gardel ML. 
Self organization in liquid droplets of cross-linked actin filaments. Mol Biol Cell 
2017;28 .
[167] White PA. Is conscious perception a series of discrete temporal frames? Conscious 
Cogn 2018;60:98–126 .
[168] Wiest MC. A quantum microtubule substrate of consciousness is experimentally 
supported and solves the binding and epiphenomenalism problems (in press.) 
Neurosci Conscious 2025;11(1):niaf011. https://doi.org/10.1093/nc/niaf011.
[169] Yu WQ, Baas PW. Changes in microtubule number and length during axon 
differentiation. J Neurosci 1994;14:2818–29 .
[170] Zeki S. A massively asynchronous, parallel brain. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol 
Sci 2015;370 .
[171] Zhang R, Mozaffari A, de Pablo JJ. Logic operations with active topological 
defects. Sci Adv 2022;8 .
[172] Zhou RG, Wang HA, Wu Q, Shi Y. Quantum associative neural network with 
nonlinear search algorithm. Int J Theor Phys 2012;51:705–23 .
[173] Zimin PI, Woods CB, Kayser EB, Ramirez JM, Morgan PG, Sedensky MM. 
Isoflurane disrupts excitatory neurotransmitter dynamics via inhibition of 
mitochondrial complex I. Br J Anaesth 2018;120:1019–32 .
[174] Doesburg SM, Green JJ, McDonald JJ, Ward LM. Rhythms of consciousness: 
binocular rivalry reveals large-scale oscillatory network dynamics mediating 
visual perception. PLoS One 2009;4:e6142 .
M.C. Wiest and A.S. Puniani                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal 30 (2025) 94–107 
107 