Predictive vs. Prospective Control: Clarifying the Terms 
of the Debate 
Andrew D Wilson*1, Gavin Buckingham2, Joost Dessing3, Otto Lappi4, Karl Friston,5 Inês 
Hipolito6, Maxwell Ramstead6, Warren Mansell7, and Rob Gray8 
1 Psychology, School of Social Sciences & Humanities, Leeds Beckett University, Leeds UK. 
a.d.wilson@leedsbeckett.ac.uk (*Corresponding Author) 
2 Department of Public Health and Sport Sciences, Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, 
University of Exeter, Exeter, UK. G.Buckingham@exeter.ac.uk 
3 School of Psychology, Queen’s University Belfast , David Keir Building, 18 -30 Malone Road, 
Belfast, BT9 5BN, Northern Ireland. j.dessing@qub.ac.uk  
4 Cognitive Science, Department of Digital Humanities , PO BOX 59, Unioninkatu 38 , FI-00014 
University of Helsinki, Finland. otto.lappi@helsinki.fi  
5 Queen Square Institute of Neurology, University College London, Queen Square, London, WC1N 
3BG, UK. k.friston@ucl.ac.uk, maxwell.d.ramstead@gmail.com    
6 Department of Philosophy , Michael Kirby Building, 17 Wally's Walk, Office 250 , Macquarie 
University, NSW 2109, Australia. ines.hipolito@mq.edu.au  
7 Curtin enAble Institute, School of Population Health, Curtin University, Kent Street, Perth, WA 
6845, Australia. wmansell@gmail.com  
8 Human Systems Engineering, University of Arizona, USA. robgray@asu.edu  
Note: except for ADW, author order is in the order their sections appear in the paper and 
alphabetical within groups, because we needed an order. ADW coordinated the paper overall.  
Abstract 
A central question in motor control is whether that control is predictive or prospective. However, 
these terms are used widely and inconsistently throughout the literature, which makes it hard 
for research to reliably build or be challenged. Our goal is to clearly identify the ways in which 
these terms get used, and to identify what each approach commits to as a theory of motor 
control. We have identified three notions of predictive control (Perception-Action, Predictive 
Processing, and the Free Energy Principle) and two of prospective control (Perceptual Control 
Theory, and Ecological Psychology), and here we briefly discuss what each entails, with 
reference to key literature and examples. We hope that this guide will help researchers be clear 
about exactly which approach they are taking, and how they have engaged with the key 
elements of their chosen approach.   
Setting the Scene 
This paper began life as an argument on Twitter that somehow went quite well. The authors, and 
others, were arguing about whether an example of skilled action could be explained via 
prospective control, or whether it was clear evidence of predictive control. So far, so typical for 
academic social media. However, what made the argument useful was a growing realisation 
that we were talking past each other, and not just at the predictive/prospective boundary. 
Different people who favoured predictive control meant different things when they said 
‘prediction’ , and the same with prospective control. We realised that terms of the debate were 
not clear anymore, and we needed to address this problem before we would ever actually get 
anywhere. This paper is the result.  
Over discussions, we identified three distinct (although related) uses of the term ‘predictive 
control’ , and two of the term ‘prospective control’ . This paper is not going to argue in favour of 
any of them; the goal is simply to briefly lay out the elements of each and point to key literature 
for more detail. We have focused on describing the elements each approach relies on in order 
to explain how motor behaviour can be anticipatory; if you are building an explanation of a 
behaviour within one of these approaches, these are the pieces you are obliged to eventually 
account for, in order to have a complete story.  
The Structure of the Paper 
The question at hand is the fact that behaviour needs to be anticipatory. By this we simply mean 
that the control being exerted at time t always needs to be done with respect to some state of 
affairs at time t+n. Reasons for this range from worrying about delays in the nervous system, 
concerns that the future state isn’t perceptually specified yet, to the simple fact that the end of 
the movement just hasn’t happened yet but must be accommodated. Regardless, the theory-
neutral fact to be accounted for is that behaviour shows clear signs of being anticipatory. 
There are two basic kinds of approach to building a system that can achieve anticipation: 
1. Predictive control, which in the broadest sense entails that the system has or embodies 
an expectation about what the future should hold, and 
2. Prospective control, which in the broadest sense entails that there is no such 
expectation required and that anticipation is achieved by interacting with the present 
in a suitable way. 
There are three notions of prediction: 
1. Perception-Action, in which predictions are expectations built using currently available 
information as proxy cues about action-relevant properties that are currently 
imperceptible. Anticipation comes from the expectation (Buckingham, Dessing) 
2. Predictive Processing, in which prediction is an architecture for efficiently transmitting 
information through a limited capacity system (by only transmitting information not 
predicted by a generative model of the task at hand). Anticipation comes from the 
generative model (Lappi) 
3. Free Energy Principle, in which prediction can be considered a way to interpret the 
behaviour of a broad class of physical systems that includes cognitive ones, and also 
something that the system embodies. Anticipation comes from the organism-
environment system dynamics (Hipolito, Friston, Ramstead).  
There are two notions of prospective control: 
1. Perceptual Control Theory entails a nested hierarchy of closed-loop, negative feedback 
networks that act so as to control the current perceptual input. Anticipation comes from 
selecting the correct input variable, and the dynamics of the network (Mansell) 
2. Ecological Psychology, which entails perceptually coupling to affordances (physical 
properties that define what actions are currently possible). Anticipation comes from the 
nature of affordances (Gray, Wilson) 
Our aim is to clarify what each approach entails, so that the important differences and possible 
overlaps can be seen more clearly. This will let future work situate itself in the landscape more 
explicitly so it can be built on or challenged more effectively. Each section is necessarily brief; 
the goal is to orient people to the key elements of each approach, and to point to key papers 
that engage with the details.  
Predictive Control 
1. Perception-Action Prediction (Buckingham, Dessing) 
In research on perception-action, apparently anticipatory behavior is frequently accounted for 
using the notion of prediction - expectations concerning, or sensory-based forecasting of, 
behaviourally-relevant environmental properties and states. Prior expectations are based on 
past experience (e.g., learning preferences of opponents in sports) or ancestral experience (e.g., 
innate ‘knowledge’ on the effects of gravity; McIntyre et al., 2001). Expectations and forecasting 
are particularly relevant to fill in or supplement sensory information when it limited, missing, or 
cannot be used quick enough to influence behaviour. Below, we will discuss pertinent research 
to illustrate these notions. 
Humans do not always have all the information required to inform pertinent aspects of their 
behaviour. For instance, when picking up an object, humans must make inferences about 
different action-relevant properties (mass, fragility, weight distribution) to ensure it is gripped 
and lifted without dropping or damaging it. These inferences are guided by expectations about 
these invisible properties derived from available perceptual cues. Fingertip force profiles when 
gripping objects, as measured by object-mounted sensors, point to the use of 
expectations/predictions particularly for two types of object interaction: (1) lifting of static 
objects and (2) oscillating hand-held objects.  
When picking up a stationary object, grip and load force must work in concert to ensure it is 
grasped with sufficient force to not slip out of the fingers (specifically, when the vertical friction 
force between fingers and object exceeds the object’s gravitational force). In experiments, 
individuals typically apply gripping and loading forces to familiar objects with a single-peaked 
force profile, indicative of pre-planning (Flanagan & Johansson, 2011; Nowak et al., 2013). 
Crucially, the peak rate of change of grip force, occurring before dynamic information becomes 
available at object liftoff, is modulated by the apparent object weight (Buckingham et al., 2009; 
Flanagan & Johansson, 2011; Hermsdörfer et al., 2011; Mon-Williams & Murray, 2000). Weight 
illusion paradigms involving stimuli with apparently different but factually equivalent weights 
have been particularly informative. Whether due to expectations associated with size cues, 
material cues, or identity cues, the first time participants lift heavier-looking objects, the peak 
rate of change of grip force is higher than when they first lift lighter-looking objects (Flanagan & 
Beltzner, 2000). Clearly, this must be caused by expectations associated with the pre-lift visual 
object appearance, presumably based on previous lifts. Other potentially useful cues (e.g., 
watching someone else lift the object) can override such expectations, at least those 
associated with object size (Buckingham et al., 2014). This change, from behavior reflecting the 
object’s initially expected weight to behavior reflecting its actual weight occurring over a 
number of trials (Grandy & Westwood, 2006), is akin to motor learning. Interestingly, this 
behavior interacts with the persistent tendency to copy forces used on the previous lift 
(Chouinard et al., 2005), and several studies have examined how these hysteresis effects and 
visual cues to mass are combined (Cashaback et al., 2016; Loh et al., 2010). Overall, this 
behavior demonstrates individuals use any relevant information available to successfully 
interact with their environment. When there is no other salient information to use, people 
default to prior experience-based expectations.  
Coordinating grip and load force becomes more challenging when oscillating hand-held 
objects. The degree to which grip force exceeds load force is the safety margin, and it is 
influenced by friction coefficients of the fingertip and the grasped surface. When oscillating a 
hand-held object, it continuously accelerates and decelerates, which influences the applied 
load force. Rather than gripping with a high-enough force to always exceed even the highest 
load force, humans tend to grip with a force that oscillates slightly in advance of self-induced 
load force changes, keeping a roughly constant safety margin (Flanagan et al., 1993; Westling & 
Johansson, 1984). Efference copies of the motor commands causing load force variations 
presumably underpin this predictive modulation. By contrast, when accelerations are imposed 
by unpredictable external forces, grip force modulations reflect non-predictive (very rapid, 
<100ms lag) reaction based on sensory feedback from fingertip afferents (Johansson & 
Westling, 1984). Although this finding has been a major driver of modern narratives around 
prediction in sensorimotor control (Wolpert & Flanagan, 2001), recent work shows that (1) grip 
and load force are only sporadically correlated during longer oscillations (Grover et al., 2018) 
and (2) anticipatory grip force modulation occurs even for objects with unpredictable load 
dynamics (Grover et al., 2021). The relationship between these variables, and thus the overall 
value of this paradigm for driving the narrative around prediction, is more nuanced has been 
previously assumed. 
Prediction as forecasting environmental states is used to account for time-pressed behaviour. 
For instance, during penalty shots in football goalkeepers have to block the ball without relying 
on visual information about the ball trajectory, because they take longer to get into position than 
the ball takes to reach the goal (300ms-450ms for well-taken penalties). Goalkeepers initially 
rely on prior expectations based on their opponent’s known shot preferences. However, when 
the kicker starts moving, they also use information contained within the kicker’s visible body 
movement to determine their leftward and rightward movement (i.e., dive) (Causer, Smeeton & 
Williams, 2017; Timmis, Turner & Van Paridon, 2014; Noël, van der Kamp & Memmert, 2015); 
vertical hand movements while diving may be based on visual ball motion (Higueras-Herbada et 
al., 2020).  
Because of the time pressure, prior expectations and information within visual kicking 
movements most likely relates to ball’s goal-entry location, which translates to the goalkeeper’s 
diving direction. With less time pressure, humans could also predict or forecast the ball 
trajectory itself (which can subsequently inform required movements). For free kicks, where 
balls typically reach the goal in over 1000ms, the exact visual ball motion influences how 
goalkeepers move to block the ball (Bootsma, Ledouit, Cassanova, & Zaal, 2016; Dessing & 
Craig, 2010; Valkanidis, Craig, Cummins, & Dessing, 2020). Goalkeepers may forecast 1) ball 
position at a specific future time (and/or vice versa), for example predicting when and where the 
ball will pass them, or 2) the entire ball trajectory and select an appropriate interception 
time/location along this trajectory. Both forms align with traditional notions of motor 
programming: predictions informing program parameters, which are updated online if needed 
(Brenner & Smeets, 2018). It should be noted that explicit behavioural evidence supporting any 
of these specific forms over alternative interception strategies has been hard to come by (Beek, 
Dessing, Peper, & Bullock, 2003).  
2. Predictive Processing (Lappi) 
Predictive processing is a popular theory of perception, cognition and how they are conducive 
to (anticipatory) control of action. Combining probabilistic modelling, neuroanatomy, machine 
learning, machine vision and various other fields, it offers an overall picture of how the 
mind/brain works (Clark, 2015; Hohwy, 2020). It is built on two ideas: (1) predictive coding and 
(2) learning from prediction error.  
Predictive coding is a technique to send messages across a limited capacity channel. It is both 
an engineering concept used to design devices, and a theory of biological systems (Rao & 
Ballard, 1999; Huang & Rao, 2011). Rather than sending “predictable” parts of a signal, only the 
new and “surprising” parts need to be transmitted, as the receiver can reconstruct the 
predictable parts at their end. The reconstruction process is "inference" based on combining 
the signal with information the receiver already possesses. (Predictability and surprise are thus 
here to be interpreted in the Shannon information sense, and reconstruction as probabilistic 
inference, or unconscious inference in the Helmholtzian sense). 
For example, suppose you are sending information about moving images from a video camera. If 
most of the pixels do not change between frames, then it is inefficient to re-send the entire 
image frame-by-frame. You only send over, for each frame, the pixels that have changed. If the 
pixels change predictably – from the point of view of the receiver in possession of some model 
of natural image statistics in the ecological context – then the signal can be compressed further 
by sending over only those parts that the model did not predict.  
The a priori information in possession of the receiver is embodied in generative models, a 
statistical description of the signal source from which distributions of “statistically expected” 
observations – predictions - can be derived. This is usually called the belief state1. Learning from 
prediction error is the process of updating the belief state by comparing predictions (expected 
observation) with the actual observation. Their difference, prediction error, is used to update the 
belief state in a way that takes into account the noise and uncertainty of information by 
precision-weighting them (e.g. approximate Bayesian computations). 
When you add to all of the foregoing the idea of a hierarchy of messages sent and received 
which maps to a neuroanatomical hierarchy, you get hierarchical predictive processing. When 
 
1 One must be careful not to take the metaphors of “belief” and “inference” and "knowledge" too far – they 
are not conscious beliefs or inferences that the agent can render in verbal form. In terms of anatomical 
implementation in humans, a generative model can be (implemented in) a neuron, population of 
neutrons, an organ like the retina or the brain, or the entire organism - or it could be even a social 
organization. This is a modelling decision on the part of the researcher. Also, the generative model 
"represents" the signal statistics, the regularity of the organism's Umwelt, if you will - it is not necessarily 
a veridical representation of the physical world. 
 
people say “predictive processing” what they often have in mind is this combination of ideas. 
(Table 1). 
For example, sending an efference copy of motor commands to generative models encoding 
beliefs about body state (as a higher level) leads to specific expectations of somatosensory 
feedback. The difference between expected and actual feedback drives learning (adaptive 
modification of the generative models), and predictive coding spares channel capacity as only 
the prediction error is the relevant part of the signal to transmit forward. This is put forward as a 
useful design to organize the transmission of information between different parts of the nervous 
system with minimal neural wiring and limited use of energy-sapping action potentials. 
2.1 Anticipatory Control in Predictive Processing 
There are two ways to think about anticipatory perception-action coordination in the predictive 
processing framework: 1) generative models as "motor programs" and 2) active inference. 
First, generative models can maintain an ‘undelayed’ estimate of body state and the 
environment. Even if observations are yet to arrive due to sensory delays motor commands can 
already be issued on the basis of the internal model (enabling feedforward control not just 
feedback control). This allows anticipation, as the system is not merely reacting to observed 
events after the fact. Note that this does not imply that the system would be forecasting, i.e. 
generating beliefs about future states. The inference generating the expectations need not (and 
probably cannot) be a full-blown veridical internal simulation of Newtonian physics running 
faster than the world itself. 
Second, in active inference, prediction error itself is used as the motor control signal (Parr, 
Pezzulo & Friston, 2022), in addition to sending prediction error up the hierarchy (for updating 
perceptual-cognitive internal models). The ensuing motor actions can then change subsequent 
sensory observations, reducing prediction error by changing the world, rather than the belief 
states. (‘active inference’). Again, action generation can be "anticipatory" because it is driven by 
top-down signals issuing information in the brain, not just "reaction" to events that have already 
taken place.  
2.2. 'Prediction' in Predictive Processing 
The notion of prediction in predictive processing refers to the capacity of generative models to 
generate predictions (expectations) of their own input signals. Under ‘the predictive brain’ view, 
every neuron or neuronal ensemble throughout the hierarchy is in the business of prediction in 
this narrow sense: issuing predictions from generative models, comparing this to actual 
observations, passing on the prediction error as observations, and using it to update the internal 
models or drive active inference.  
Again, none of this means they are in the business of forecasting future events in the world or 
explicitly modelling the world. Take the outfielder problem (Chapman, 1968; McBeath, Scharfer 
& Kaiser, 1995; Rozendaal & van Soest, 2003). A standard ‘cognitive’ account involves 
simulating the motion of the ball and forecasting the interception point. The predictive 
processing account of the outfielder's visual strategy is not incompatible with an ecological 
(prospective) optical acceleration cancellation account: but here the observer is not 
coordinating movement based on optical acceleration in the optic array itself, but instead an 
"internal perceptual-cognitive estimate" of optical acceleration (to handle noise and 
uncertainty arising from sensor movement). Feedback keeps coming in after execution is 
initiated, internal models are constantly being used to filter noisy signals through predictive 
coding, predictions are constantly being issued and generating prediction errors and these 
constantly update the respective generative models. 
Thus, in the PP framework veridicality is not necessary for forecasting, forecasting is not 
necessary for prediction, and prediction is not necessary for anticipation (when anticipation is 
defined as negative response times).  
3. The Free Energy Principle (FEP; Friston, Hipolito, Ramstead) 
The FEP is a mathematical principle at the intersection of information theory, random dynamical 
systems theory, and statistical physics, which forms the basis of a widely applicable, 
mathematical physics-based approach to modelling (Friston, 2019; Ramstead et al., 2023). The 
FEP per se is the statement that if a system can be partitioned into subsystems that are 
separated but coupled through a boundary, known as a Markov blanket, then we can model the 
dynamics (or observable behavior) of the system as a gradient flow on a quantity called 
surprisal; which means that things evolve towards configurations or states that are 
characteristic of (unsurprising for) the type of thing that they are. Surprisal is simply the negative 
log probability of outcomes, and its tractable upper bound is called variational free energy. 
Mathematically, we usually write down a representation of statistical relations that hold 
between subsystems as a generative model, which is a joint probability distribution that 
captures the dynamical dependence relations that characterize the interactions between 
things. In this context, we say that the system “entails” a generative model, meaning that its 
dynamics can be described by a (free energy) function of the generative model and the internal 
states (Ramstead et al., 2020). 
The FEP provides a useful, teleological interpretation of dynamics, because it lends them an 
inferential interpretation: that is, if a system conforms to the FEP , in the sense that its dynamics 
minimize surprisal (on average), then it will look to an external observer as if its subsystems 
track each other vicariously, across their respective boundaries (Ramstead, Sakthivadivel, & 
Friston, 2024). More precisely, it will look as if the system is performing approximate Bayesian 
inference about the latent causes of sensory perturbations, based on the generative model that 
it entails. This means that the internal states of a thing that conforms to the FEP can be 
interpreted as if they encode and update the parameters of probability densities (i.e., posterior 
Bayesian beliefs) about external states, by resolving prediction errors under the generative 
model entailed by the thing in question. 
There are five senses of “prediction” under the FEP .  
First, “prediction” follows from the objective function used in applications of the FEP . This is 
because variational free energy can be decomposed into predictive accuracy minus complexity. 
If a system conforms to the FEP - if its dynamics minimize free energy on average - then it will 
look as if that thing maximizes the predictive accuracy of the “beliefs” that it encodes, while 
minimizing the complexity of those beliefs (Friston, 2010).  
Second, the inertial path of a system through its state-space can be cast as a kind of “embodied 
prediction” about its future state (Friston et al., 2023). Indeed, in path-based formulations of the 
FEP , surprisal quantifies how far the real path taken by the system strays from its inertial path 
(i.e., its path of least action; Sakthivadivel, 2022). Given this, we can think of systemic 
responses to perturbations as a kind of belief updating, correcting or updating the path taken by 
the particle, given the “prediction” that looks as if it is “encoded” in its inertial trajectory.  
Third, the path taken by a system can also be modeled as involving a form of prediction under 
the FEP . The idea is that the time evolution of any random dynamical system can be 
decomposed (via the Helmholtz decomposition) into a curl-free (aka dissipative) component 
and a divergence-free (or solenoidal) component. Under the FEP , the solenoidal flow can be 
regarded as a “prediction” and the dissipative flow can be regarded as the “update” based on 
perturbations or sensory “data” afforded by fluctuations on the Markov blanket (Friston et al., 
2023). In layman's terms, we can think of the itinerant dynamics of any random dynamical 
system as providing “predictions, ” which are then “updated” based on the exchanges between 
that system and its environment ("new data").  
In the three cases discussed above, the notion of prediction is implicit: that is, the particle does 
not make predictions based on a statistical model that it has. Rather, the particle is or entails a 
generative model (Friston, 2011). However, we can consider certain internal dynamics that 
brings us closer to the explicit notion of prediction found in the other accounts. 
Fourth, in certain kinds of things, predictions and prediction errors can come to be represented 
explicitly, e.g., by the activity of populations of neurons (Friston, 2010; Friston, 2019). In 
predictive coding, the hierarchical structure of the brain is read in terms of message passing 
among neural populations (Hipólito et al., 2021; Friston et al., 2021). Descending messages are 
thought to convey predictions, and ascending messages are thought to convey prediction 
errors. In this setup, we have explicit predictions being issued by neuronal populations, 
corresponding to downward messages; these predictions can either function to convey the 
most probable next sensory state, or alternatively, function to weigh the precision or gain of 
ascending messages (Friston, 2010). In a control theoretic context (cf. perceptual control 
theory), these predictions can be regarded as furnishing set points for specific sensory states.  
The fifth and final sense of prediction comes into play when the generative model includes the 
consequence of one’s own action or behavior (Friston et al., 2023). This is an important class of 
inference that could be regarded as definitive of active inference, and which introduces the 
notion of planning. The ensuing kind of prediction is based on expected free energy; namely, on 
expectations about the free energy that an agent will encounter by pursuing given policies. The 
requisite counterfactual predictions—made by agents—means that action itself becomes 
represented in the generative model. In other words, action becomes a hidden cause of sensory 
states, leading to the notion of planning as inference. This sort of active inference calls upon the 
selection of actions on the basis of predicting their outcomes in the future. In this setting, the 
surprisal expected under a particular course of action rests upon explicit predictions about the 
consequences of that action, based upon posterior (i.e., Bayesian) beliefs about current states 
of affairs. This lends a distinctively teleological (purposeful) aspect to particle dynamics: things 
that (look as if) they plan into the future seem exquisitely designed to engage in context-
sensitive adaptive behavior, allowing for context-appropriate interaction with, and real time 
adjustment to, its environment.  
The question arises whether there is a distinction between the senses of “prediction” in play 
under the FEP and that which arises in the literature on “predictive processing” (Clark, 2013, 
2015). Clark chose the term “predictive processing” to avoid committing to any particular 
implementation of the general idea of prediction-based cognition—e.g., avoiding a specific 
commitment to the existence of distinct neural populations encoding predictions and 
prediction errors, as postulated by hierarchical predictive coding—and to avoid predicating 
predictive processing on first principles accounts (such as the FEP). Thus, Clark stakes out an 
argumentative position whereby one can adopt a perspective on the brain as an “engine of 
prediction” without this view rising or falling along with specific process theories or applicability 
of various principles.  
Does it make sense to speak of the kind of “prediction” involved in the FEP and in predictive 
processing separately? Yes and no. One can certainly describe the explicit kinds of prediction 
(the fourth and fifth definitions) without reference to the first three, implicit kinds. In fact, on one 
reading, one can motivate predictive processing in a way that completely avoids an application 
of the FEP . That is, one does not need to understand the detailed constructions involved in the 
FEP to understand—or explain—how predictive coding works in the brain. And indeed, 
predictive coding emerged in engineering and neuroscience (e.g., Rao & Ballard, 1999; Knill & 
Pouget, 2004) before the FEP was first formulated. In a similar vein, one does not need to apply 
the FEP to do Kalman filtering or model predictive control. On another reading, however, the 
connection between these notions of prediction is absolutely essential, and follow from the FEP 
directly. One might argue that the information physics provided by the FEP allows us to justify 
the formalism upon which it rests—which might otherwise appear ad hoc—from first principles. 
Then, it becomes clear that things do not exist because they predict. Rather, things that exist 
look as if they are predicting, in one or more of the senses described above (Constant, 2021). 
Prospective Control 
1. Perceptual Control Theory (PCT; Mansell) 
The following is an explanation of prospective control based on perceptual control theory (PCT; 
Powers, Clark, & McFarland, 1960a,b; Powers, 1973). The central tenet of PCT is that 
‘behaviour is the control of perception. ’ Control itself is defined as achieving and maintaining 
perceptual variables at internally specified reference values despite disturbances to those 
variables. Perceptual variables are constructed functions of sensory inputs that correspond 
with properties of the environment or self and that have the potential to be controlled, usually 
along a single dimension. For example, the lateral position of an object in the visual field is a 
perceptual variable, as is its perceived distance and velocity. PCT uses negative feedback 
control which is the process of subtracting the current value of a perceptual variable from 
a reference value (the goal), to generate an error that is transformed into an output that affects 
the aspect of the environment that is being controlled - known as the feedback function, to act 
against disturbances (e.g. wind, a rough surface, unintended effects of other muscles in the 
body) to keep the perceptual variable at its reference value. The external feedback pathway 
through the environment is an essential link in the chain from action to perception. Feedback 
pathways can be provided by the agent’s body, the natural environment and any artefacts in the 
vicinity (Figure 1).  
In this closed loop, past action continues through the loop at the same time whilst new error is 
being computed. In addition, there is simple extrapolation of a past output signal to the 
immediate future. The signals passing through a control loop are, to varying degrees, partially 
integrated over time; thus, historic signals in the control loop ‘overshoot’; they continue to have 
an effect into the present and immediate future. 
One effect of these extrapolative properties of a control loop is that it appears to the observer as 
if the agent is predicting the future location of a moving object, leading them to continue the 
same actions even when the object disappears or changes course. This effect is also shown in 
demonstrations and accounts for why an action, such as tracking a moving object, continues 
even after the target of that action is removed or occluded (Marken, 2002). A related effect can 
occur when the perception of the position of an object is biased to being further forward along 
its trajectory, by integrating this position signal with its current velocity. A computational model 
of visuomanual tracking of a moving target that employed this bias showed a closer fit with 
participant data, compensating for signal delays and therefore allowing control to be 
prospectively ahead of an otherwise delayed purely positional perceptual signal of the object 
(Parker et al., 2021). 
The operationalisation of behaviour as the negative feedback control of input entails a simple 
answer to many instances of prospective control. If a system specifies the correct 
controlled variables (CVs) and controls them by acting dynamically against current 
disturbances, current action can appear to be operating in an anticipatory manner.  
The first step to establish if a PCT model can account for an instance of prospective control is to 
identify the CVs for a specific task. Object interception can illustrate prospective control as the 
control of input (e.g. Marken, 2005). PCT has been applied across a wide variety of contexts, 
including humans catching fly balls in baseball (Marken, 2005), throwing a ball to oneself 
(Shaffer et al., 2015), dogs intercepting a frisbee (Shaffer et al., 2004), and even objects like toy 
helicopters that move in irregular trajectories (Shaffer et al., 2013). In each case, the same 
overall model fitted well with behavioural data. However, in some cases, a different CV provided 
a better fit to the data. For example, in intercepting toy helicopters, models that control optical 
velocity, rather than acceleration showed a better fit to the behavioural data (Shaffer et al., 
2013). Nonetheless, whichever CV is identified, the principle is the same - that the intercepting 
agent reaches a position at which they can intercept the object in the near future through 
controlling a simple perceptual variable in the present moment.  
One way to illustrate this account further is to construct a model from two simple negative 
feedback control systems: one that controls the vertical optical acceleration of the image of 
moving object on the visual field to keep it at zero (a constant velocity) as it moves in the air, and 
one that controls the lateral optical angle - the sideways deviation of the image of the object 
from straight ahead (Marken, 2005). This work began with the modelling of flyball catching in 
baseball. The first observation with regards to this model is that it reliably leads the simulated 
fielder to end up in a position on the pitch that is close to the landing position of the ball. This 
can be viewed in an online simulation2; see Figure 2. Importantly, the agent in the simulation 
appears to have ‘predicted’ where the ball would land; yet there is no prediction involved within 
the code; only the control of a current perceptual signal.  
In PCT, control systems are organised in a hierarchy so that they remember and control 
increasingly abstract perceptual variables that are formed from inputs from an integration of 
layers below. Thus, signals denoting the current state of perceptual variables cascade upwards 
at the same time as the reference values for these variables cascade downwards. These 
reference values are not predictions of future states of a variable; they are wanted/controlled 
states of the variable, whether they are predictable or not. The levels of the hierarchy, alongside 
examples within an apparently unitary ‘behaviour’ - having a coffee - are illustrated in Figure 3. 
One example of these layers is configuration - the pattern, or shape, of combinations of 
sensations. Controlling a configuration means that an agent can specify and reproduce a shape 
over time, such as drawing the letter ‘S’ . When combined with simple extrapolation as described 
 
2 https://www.mindreadings.com/ControlDemo/CatchXY .html  
above, control of a periodic, sinusoidal configuration also entails that a sinusoidal movement 
can be controlled accurately with close-to-zero lags and a model of this kind has been 
constructed using PCT (Parker, 2023).  
At still higher levels in Powers’ hierarchy, the levels perceive variables that entail more complex 
and potentially longer-term prospective control, including sequences and if-then programs. The 
mental rehearsal of a plan or program prior to enacting it is also modelled within PCT and can 
predict the future state(s) of a variable. Yet, mental simulation is itself an internally controlled 
process. 
  
2. Ecological Psychology (Gray, Wilson) 
For ecological psychology (Gibson, 1979) prospective control is made possible by the 
perception of affordances. These are features of the present task environment that identify what 
is possible, and the ecological hypothesis is that we perceive these and organise our behaviour 
with respect to them. The first element of ecological prospective control, therefore, is a formal 
definition of affordances. Second, we need a complementary analysis of behavioural 
possibilities; these will be effectivities. Third, affordances and effectivities must be able to be 
coupled; this will be via specifying information variables. Anticipatory behaviour then emerges 
in a prospective fashion from a perception-action loop in which an affordance and an effectivity 
are coupled via information. This section will detail these elements, and outline two ways 
ecological psychology uses them to explain anticipatory behaviour.  
Affordances & Effectivities (Turvey, 1992)  
Affordances need to be properties that identify possible behaviours; something that could 
happen, but that is not currently happening. One such general class of properties are 
dispositions3 (Mumford, 2003). Dispositions are actualised by a complementary disposition in 
another object, the way a key opens a lock. The classic example is solubility. Salt is disposed to 
break apart in water because of its chemical structure, even when salt is not in the presence of 
water; the relevant properties that define salt’s possible future behaviour exist in the present. 
This makes them the right kind of property to enable ecological prospective control, which is 
why Turvey (1992) formalised affordances as a kind of disposition. He then labelled the 
behavioural complementary dispositional properties effectivities. 
Gibson characterised affordances this way: 
 
3 There is a debate in ecological psychology about whether affordances are best formalized as 
dispositions or relations (Chemero, 2009; Rietveld & Kiverstein, 2014; Stoffregan, 2003). Only the 
dispositional analysis has been applied to the question of prospective motor control, so we are relying on 
it here in order to lay out the logic of ecological prospective control.  
If a terrestrial surface is nearly horizontal (instead of slanted), nearly flat 
(instead of convex or concave), and sufficiently extended (relative to the size of 
the animal) and if its substance is rigid (relative to the weight of the animal), 
then the surface affords support. It is a surface of support, and we call it a 
substratum, ground, or floor. It is stand- on-able, permitting an upright posture 
for quadrupeds and bipeds… 
Note that the four properties listed—horizontal, flat, extended, and rigid—would 
be physical properties of a surface if they were measured with the scales and 
standard units used in physics. As an affordance of support for a species of 
animal, however, they have to be measured relative to the animal. They are 
unique for that animal. They are not just abstract physical properties. They have 
unity relative to the posture and behavior of the animal being considered. 
Gibson, 1979/2015, pg. 119 
Note that the affordance is a higher-order property constituted by several lower-order properties 
placed in a specific relation to each other, and that the affordance has ‘a unity’ relative to the 
animal; it is a property in its own right. The details of that property are also identified by 
(“measured relative to”) properties of the animal. This description aligns nicely with the 
ontology of dispositions. 
Specifying Information Variables (Turvey et al., 1981) 
The final step is to provide a way for affordances and effectivities to be brought into suitable 
contact via perception. In order to be perceived, properties of the world must be projected into 
a medium that allows an organism to interact with those properties at a distance. Ecological 
psychology proposes that properties such as affordances are projected into arrays (optic, 
acoustic, and others) that fully surround (are ambient to) both the property and the organism. 
The details of this lawful projection process lead to specifying information variables that allow 
perception to be direct. 
Action-relevant properties of the environment are dynamical (fully describable with units of 
mass, time, position, and the temporal derivatives of position). These then interact with ambient 
energy media according to the laws of physics, and these lawful interactions structure the 
media into arrays. Perceptual arrays can be fully described kinematically (no mass). The loss of 
the mass dimension means information cannot be identical to the environmental property 
(Bingham, 1988), but the lawful nature of the projection process allows the information to be 
specific to that property; one pattern, one property (Runeson & Frykholm, 1983; Turvey, Shaw, 
Reed & Mace, 1981). An organism can detect this specifying information variable and use it to 
couple its effectivities to the affordances of the environment.  
Ecological prospective control therefore entails assembling an effectivity that is disposed to 
complement the affordances of the task environment, perceived via a specifying information 
variable. The possible action becomes an actual action; anticipation comes from the nature of 
affordances. 
There are two ways to bring these pieces together in the ecological literature.  
1. Behavioural Dynamics (Warren, 1988, 2006) 
In behavioural dynamics, an affordance specifies a class of actions to the organism (action 
modes: Warren, 1988). Affordances are perceived via action-scaled specifying information, and 
this selects the relevant action mode. This mode must be controlled so that a particular version 
of the action, appropriate to the current task, is what happens. This is done via laws of control 
(Warren, 2006) which map changes in information to changes in organism dynamics and vice 
versa. If that pattern specifies a future state (the ‘current future’; Bootsma, 2009), then moving 
so as to create that pattern means the future state will unfold.  
The classic example is Chapman’s (1968) optical acceleration cancellation strategy for 
intercepting a fly ball. Moving so as to null the optical acceleration of the ball leads to 
successful interception, and this law of control, applied to the affordance-selected action 
mode, ensures successful future-oriented action. Most work in ecological psychology has 
followed this approach. 
2. Affordance-Based Control (Fajen, 2007) 
Behavioural dynamics has two limitations; information-based control laws are not necessarily 
prospective, and they specify what is required to achieve a goal, not whether that is possible. 
Fajen (2007) therefore proposed that affordances should also feature in the online control of 
actions; the information used to couple organism dynamics to the task should specify 
affordances, in particular. This is affordance-based control.  
Fajen’s example is braking. He proposes that braking is controlled so that ideal deceleration (the 
constant deceleration that will being you to a soft stop at the intended location) is always less 
that the maximum deceleration capability of the brakes. In effect, we try to move so that 
successful braking is always afforded. First, you perceive your current deceleration. Second, 
you perceive the ideal deceleration (defined by the affordance dynamics) calibrated to units of 
maximum deceleration (defined by the effectivity dynamics). If this calibration is correct, then 
the values of these two variables will always drift away from one another (e.g. increasing your 
deceleration will reduce the required ideal acceleration). Critically, this is not true if you are 
incorrectly calibrated; if you have just hooked a large trailer to your car and are still acting as if 
the brake will work the same as without the trailer, then perceived current deceleration and 
perceived ideal deceleration will drift towards each other. The perception of two perceptual 
variables and the relationship between them is enough to produce calibration and therefore 
successful affordance-based control. 
Summary 
This paper has briefly described the basic elements entailed by taking each of five different 
approaches to explaining anticipatory motor control. The goal is simply to orient readers, and to 
encourage researchers to more explicitly situate their work in the landscape we have laid out. 
We hope that this guide, and the key literature we have cited, will stand as a useful point of 
reference for debate in the field of motor control.   
  
References 
Beek, P . J., Dessing, J. C., Peper, C. E., & Bullock, D. (2003). Modelling the control of interceptive 
actions. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological 
Sciences, 358(1437), 1511–1523. 
Bingham, G. P . (1988). Task-specific devices and the perceptual bottleneck. Human Movement 
Science, 7(2-4), 225-264. 
Bootsma, R. J. (2009). The (current) future is here! Perception, 38(6), 851-858. 
Bootsma, R. J., Ledouit, S., Casanova, R., & Zaal, F . T . (2016). Fractional-order information in the 
visual control of lateral locomotor interception. Journal of Experimental Psychology. Human 
Perception and Performance, 42(4), 517–529. 
Brenner, E., & Smeets, J. B. J. (2018). Continuously updating one's predictions underlies 
successful interception. Journal of Neurophysiology, 120(6), 3257–3274. 
Buckingham, G., Cant, J. S., & Goodale, M. A. (2009). Living in a material world: How visual cues 
to material properties affect the way that we lift objects and perceive their weight. Journal of 
Neurophysiology, 102(6), 3111–3118. 
Buckingham, G., Wong, J. D., Tang, M., Gribble, P . L., & Goodale, M. A. (2014). Observing object 
lifting errors modulates cortico-spinal excitability and improves object lifting performance. 
Cortex, 50, 115-124. 
Causer, J., Smeeton, N. J., & Williams, A. M. (2017). Expertise differences in anticipatory 
judgements during a temporally and spatially occluded task. PloS One, 12(2), e0171330.  
Cashaback, J. G., McGregor, H. R., Pun, H. C., Buckingham, G., & Gribble, P . L. (2017). Does the 
sensorimotor system minimize prediction error or select the most likely prediction during object 
lifting?. Journal of Neurophysiology, 117(1), 260-274.  
Chapman, S. (1968). Catching a baseball. American Journal of Physics, 36(10), 868–870. 
Chouinard, P . A., Leonard, G., & Paus, T. (2005). Role of the primary motor and dorsal premotor 
cortices in the anticipation of forces during object lifting. The Journal of Neuroscience, 25(9), 
2277–2284. 
Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the future of cognitive 
science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36(3), 181-204. 
Clark, A. (2015). Surfing uncertainty: Prediction, action, and the embodied mind. Oxford 
University Press.  
Dessing, J. C., & Craig, C. M. (2010). Bending it like Beckham: how to visually fool the 
goalkeeper. PloS One, 5(10), e13161.  
Fajen, B. R. (2007). Affordance-based control of visually guided action. Ecological Psychology, 
19(4), 383-410. 
Flanagan, J. R., & Beltzner, M. A. (2000). Independence of perceptual and sensorimotor 
predictions in the size-weight illusion. Nature Neuroscience, 3(7), 737–741.  
Flanagan, J. R., & Johansson, R. S. (2011). Object representations used in action and 
perception. In Motor Control: Theories, Experiments, and Applications. Oxford University Press. 
Flanagan, J. R., Tresilian, J., & Wing, A. M. (1993). Coupling of grip force and load force during 
arm movements with grasped objects. Neuroscience Letters, 152(1–2), 53–56.  
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory?. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 11(2), 127-138.  
Friston, K. (2011). Embodied inference: Or I think therefore I am, if I am what I think. The 
implications of embodiment (Cognition and Communication), 89-125.  
Friston, K. (2019). A free energy principle for a particular physics. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1906.10184.  
Friston, K., Da Costa, L., Sajid, N., Heins, C., Ueltzhöffer, K., Pavliotis, G. A., & Parr, T. (2023). The 
free energy principle made simpler but not too simple. Physics Reports, 1024, 1-29. 
Friston, K., Da Costa, L., Sakthivadivel, D. A., Heins, C., Pavliotis, G. A., Ramstead, M., & Parr, T. 
(2023). Path integrals, particular kinds, and strange things. Physics of Life Reviews.  
Friston, K. J., Fagerholm, E. D., Zarghami, T. S., Parr, T., Hipólito, I., Magrou, L., & Razi, A. (2021). 
Parcels and particles: Markov blankets in the brain. Network Neuroscience, 5(1), 211-251.  
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual perception. Houghton Mifflin. 
Grandy, M. S., & Westwood, D. A. (2006). Opposite perceptual and sensorimotor responses to a 
size-weight illusion. Journal of Neurophysiology, 95(6), 3887–3892.  
Grover, F ., Lamb, M., Bonnette, S., Silva, P . L., Lorenz, T., & Riley, M. A. (2018). Intermittent 
coupling between grip force and load force during oscillations of a hand-held object. 
Experimental Brain Research, 236(10), 2531–2544.  
Grover, F . M., Riehm, C., Silva, P . L., Lorenz, T., & Riley, M. A. (2021). Grip force anticipation of 
nonlinear, underactuated load force. Journal of Neurophysiology, 125(5), 1647–1662.  
Hermsdörfer, J., Li, Y ., Randerath, J., Goldenberg, G., & Eidenmüller, S. (2011). Anticipatory 
scaling of grip forces when lifting objects of everyday life. Experimental Brain Research, 212(1), 
19–31.  
Higueras-Herbada, A., Lopes, J. E., Travieso, D., Ibáñez-Gijón, J., Araújo, D., & Jacobs, D. M. 
(2020). Height after side: Goalkeepers detect the vertical direction of association-football 
penalty kicks from the ball trajectory. Frontiers in Psychology, 11, 311.  
Hohwy, J. (2020). New directions in predictive processing. Mind & Language, 35(2), 209-223. 
Huang, Y ., & Rao, R. P . (2011). Predictive coding. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive 
Science, 2(5), 580-593. 
Hipólito, I., Ramstead, M. J., Convertino, L., Bhat, A., Friston, K., & Parr, T. (2021). Markov 
blankets in the brain. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 125, 88-97.  
Johansson, R. S., & Westling, G. (1984). Roles of glabrous skin receptors and sensorimotor 
memory in automatic control of precision grip when lifting rougher or more slippery objects. 
Experimental Brain Research, 56(3), 550–564. 
Knill, D. C., & Pouget, A. (2004). The Bayesian brain: the role of uncertainty in neural coding and 
computation. TRENDS in Neurosciences, 27(12), 712-719.  
Loh, M. N., Kirsch, L., Rothwell, J. C., Lemon, R. N., & Davare, M. (2010). Information about the 
weight of grasped objects from vision and internal models interacts within the primary motor 
cortex. Journal of Neuroscience, 30(20), 6984–6990. 
Marken, R. S. (2002). Looking at behavior through control theory glasses. Review of General 
Psychology, 6(3), 260-270. 
Marken, R. S. (2005). Optical trajectories and the informational basis of fly ball catching. Journal 
of Experimental Psychology, 31(3), 630-634. 
McBeath, M. K., Shaffer, D. M., & Kaiser, M. K. (1995). How baseball outfielders determine where 
to run to catch fly balls. Science, 268(5210), 569–573. 
McIntyre, J., Zago, M., Berthoz, A., & Lacquaniti, F . (2001). Does the brain model Newton's laws?. 
Nature Neuroscience, 4(7), 693–694.  
Mon-Williams, M., & Murray, A. H. (2000). The size of the visual size cue used for programming 
manipulative forces during precision grip. Experimental Brain Research, 135(3), 405–410. 
Mumford, S. (2003). Dispositions. Clarendon Press. 
Noël, B., van der Kamp, J., & Memmert, D. (2015). Implicit goalkeeper influences on goal side 
selection in representative penalty kicking tasks. PloS One, 10(8), e0135423.  
Nowak, D. A., Glasauer, S., & Hermsdörfer, J. (2013). Force control in object manipulation—A 
model for the study of sensorimotor control strategies. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 
37(8), 1578–1586.  
Parker, M. (2023). Motor control as the control of perception. In Mansell, W., de Hullu, Huddy, V ., 
& Scholte, T. [Eds.], The Interdisciplinary Handbook of Perceptual Control Theory: Volume II. 
Academic Press.  
Parker, M. G., Weightman, A. P ., Tyson, S. F ., Abbott, B., & Mansell, W. (2021). Sensorimotor 
delays in tracking may be compensated by negative feedback control of motion-extrapolated 
position. Experimental Brain Research, 239, 189-204. 
Parr, T., Pezzulo, G., & Friston, K. J. (2022). Active inference: the free energy principle in mind, 
brain, and behavior. MIT Press. 
Powers, W. T. (1973). Behavior: The control of perception. Benchmark Press. 
Powers, W. T. (1998). Making sense of behavior. New Canaan, CT: Benchmark. 
Powers, W. T., Clark, R. K., & Farland, R. M. (1960a). A general feedback theory of human 
behavior: Part I. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 11(1), 71-88. 
Powers, W. T., Clark, R. K., & McFarland, R. L. (1960b). A general feedback theory of human 
behavior: Part II. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 11(3), 309-323. 
Ramstead, M. J., Kirchhoff, M. D., & Friston, K. J. (2020). A tale of two densities: Active inference 
is enactive inference. Adaptive Behavior, 28(4), 225-239. 
Ramstead, M. J., Sakthivadivel, D. A., & Friston, K. J. (2024). An approach to non-equilibrium 
statistical physics using variational Bayesian inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11630. 
Ramstead, M. J., Sakthivadivel, D. A., Heins, C., Koudahl, M., Millidge, B., Da Costa, L., ... & 
Friston, K. J. (2023). On Bayesian mechanics: a physics of and by beliefs. Interface Focus, 13(3), 
20220029. 
Rao, R. P ., & Ballard, D. H. (1999). Predictive coding in the visual cortex: a functional 
interpretation of some extra-classical receptive-field effects. Nature Neuroscience, 2(1), 79-87. 
Rozendaal, L. A., & van Soest, A. J. (2003). Optical acceleration cancellation: A viable 
interception strategy? Biological Cybernetics, 89(6), 415–425. 
Runeson, S., & Frykholm, G. (1983). Kinematic specification of dynamics as an informational 
basis for person-and-action perception: expectation, gender recognition, and deceptive 
intention. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 112(4), 585. 
Sakthivadivel, D. A. (2022). A worked example of the Bayesian mechanics of classical objects. 
In International Workshop on Active Inference (pp. 298-318). Cham: Springer Nature 
Switzerland. 
Shaffer, D. M., Marken, R. S., Dolgov, I., & Maynor, A. B. (2013). Chasin’ choppers: Using 
unpredictable trajectories to test theories of object interception. Attention, Perception, & 
Psychophysics, 75, 1496-1506. 
Shaffer, D. M., Marken, R. S., Dolgov, I., & Maynor, A. B. (2015). Catching objects thrown to 
oneself: Testing control strategies for object interception in a novel domain. Perception, 44(4), 
400-409. 
Shaffer, D. M., Krauchunas, S. M., Eddy, M., & McBeath, M. K. (2004). How dogs navigate to 
catch Frisbees. Psychological Science, 15(7), 437-441. 
Timmis, M. A., Turner, K., & van Paridon, K. N. (2014). Visual search strategies of soccer players 
executing a power vs. placement penalty kick. PloS One, 9(12), e115179.  
Turvey, M. T. (1992). Affordances and prospective control: An outline of the ontology. Ecological 
Psychology, 4(3), 173-187. 
Turvey, M. T., Shaw, R. E., Reed, E. S., & Mace, W. M. (1981). Ecological laws of perceiving and 
acting: In reply to Fodor and Pylyshyn (1981). Cognition, 9(3), 237-304. 
Valkanidis, T. C., Craig, C. M., Cummins, A., & Dessing, J. C. (2020). A goalkeeper's performance 
in stopping free kicks reduces when the defensive wall blocks their initial view of the ball. PloS 
One, 15(12), e0243287.  
Warren, W. H. (1988). Action modes and laws of control for the visual guidance of action. In 
Advances in Psychology (Vol. 50, pp. 339-379). North-Holland. 
Warren, W. H. (2006). The dynamics of perception and action. Psychological Review, 113(2), 
358. 
Westling, G., & Johansson, R. S. (1984). Factors influencing the force control during precision 
grip. Experimental Brain Research, 53(2), 277–284. 
Wolpert, D. M., & Flanagan, J. R. (2001). Motor prediction. Current Biology, 11(18), R729–R732.  
  
Tables 
 
Table 1. Summary of the key terms from the Predictive Processing approach. 
  

Figures 
 
Figure 1. A control unit based on PCT. Reproduced with permission from Dag Forssell. 
  

 
Figure 2. Marken’s simulation at www.mindreadings.com.  
On the left is the randomly generated trajectory of a flyball in the dotted line and the movement 
of the agent on a simulated landscape is the unbroken line. The top right shows the (controlled) 
retinal image of the agent, and the bottom right shows the speed of the agent over time. Each 
time the simulation is run, the agent gets to the landing location of the ball, apparently 
predicting this, in the absence of any prediction, inference or probabilistic reasoning within the 
computer model. 
  

 
Figure 3. The levels of control and perception with a hierarchy as proposed by Powers (1998), 
and illustrated by Fred Nickols, permission provided (www.nickols.us)  
 
