Citation: Wright, J.; Bourke, P .
Markov Blankets and Mirror
Symmetries—Free Energy
Minimization and Mesocortical
Anatomy. Entropy 2024, 26, 287.
https://doi.org/10.3390/e26040287
Academic Editors: Thomas Parr,
Giovanni Pezzulo, Rosalyn Moran,
Maxwell Ramstead, Axel Constant
and Anjali Bhat
Received: 26 February 2024
Revised: 21 March 2024
Accepted: 25 March 2024
Published: 27 March 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
entropy
Article
Markov Blankets and Mirror Symmetries—Free Energy
Minimization and Mesocortical Anatomy
James Wright 1, * and Paul Bourke 2
1 Centre for Brain Research, and Department of Psychological Medicine, School of Medicine, University of
Auckland, Auckland 1010, New Zealand
2 School of Social Sciences, Faculty of Arts, Business, Law and Education, University of Western Australia,
Perth, WA 6009, Australia
* Correspondence: jj.w@xtra.co.nz
Abstract: A theoretical account of development in mesocortical anatomy is derived from the free
energy principle, operating in a neural field with both Hebbian and anti-Hebbian neural plasticity.
An elementary structural unit is proposed, in which synaptic connections at mesoscale are arranged
in paired patterns with mirror symmetry. Exchanges of synaptic flux in each pattern form coupled
spatial eigenmodes, and the line of mirror reflection between the paired patterns operates as a Markov
blanket, so that prediction errors in exchanges between the pairs are minimized. The theoretical
analysis is then compared to the outcomes from a biological model of neocortical development, in
which neuron precursors are selected by apoptosis for cell body and synaptic connections maximizing
synchrony and also minimizing axonal length. It is shown that this model results in patterns of
connection with the anticipated mirror symmetries, at micro-, meso- and inter-arial scales, among
lateral connections, and in cortical depth. This explains the spatial organization and functional
significance of neuron response preferences, and is compatible with the structural form of both
columnar and noncolumnar cortex. Multi-way interactions of mirrored representations can provide a
preliminary anatomically realistic model of cortical information processing.
Keywords: free energy principle; active inference; predictive coding; Markov blankets; cortical
development; cortical mesoanatomy; cortical self-organization
1. Introduction
This paper argues that the free energy principle can be used to derive a model of
neocortical self-organization accounting for anatomical structure and function at millimetric
(mesoanatomical) scale.
Embryologically the neocortex develops in accord with the “structural model” [1–4].
Neuron precursors migrate and differentiate under genetic control along radial pathways
from archi- and paleocortical precursors, the pathways of migration partly determining
later functional connections between neocortex and subcortical systems [5,6]. As cellular
differentiations proceed, cell connectivity also undergoes modification under the distance
rule [7,8] which describes inter-areal connectivity as an approximation to shortest and
locally dense pathways–an arrangement facilitating metabolic efficiency and rapid inter-
actions in a “small world”. Actual anatomy is a compromise between the radial versus
small world arrangements [9]. Ultimately the neocortex becomes a closed extended sheet,
embracing the subcortical systems from which it has arisen, and organized in depth as a
six-layered structure of mixed excitatory and inhibitory cells [10]; essentially two layers
of cell bodies with other layers in which inputs are received and lateral axons–largely
excitatory-spread over greater distances. Among these laterally spreading axonal con-
nections the superficial patch system is prominent [ 11–13]. This is made up of patches
of cells that make connections skipping from patch to neighbouring patches in several
Entropy 2024, 26, 287. https://doi.org/10.3390/e26040287 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/entropy
Entropy 2024, 26, 287 2 of 17
steps, and thus forming gridworks apparently organized to distribute information between
cortical locales.
Lateral organization is highly variable at mesoanatomical scale, although much effort
has been made to systematize the appearances [14]. Some parts of the cortex-notably the
primary visual cortex of large animals–are organized in a columnar fashion, in which
zones of short axon neurons are surrounded by groups of superficial patch cells, creating
macrocolumns, but elsewhere this organization is minimal to apparently absent. Yet the
superficial patch system is ubiquitous, and is overlapping where columnar organization is
absent [12]. Within macrocolumns individual cells exhibit organization according to the
stimulus preferences of cells. Neurons that respond to straight line visual stimuli are orga-
nized about the center of macrocolumns, with orientation preference from 0–180 degrees
circling the center from 0–360 degrees, creating a singularity [15]. Superficial patch cells
have a tendency to link cells with common orientation preference in adjacent columns–“like
to like” [ 16]. Cells also show orderly, but more complicated structured preferences for
stimulus spatial and temporal frequencies [17]. In noncolumnar cortex neurons also show
the same types of preference, but with minimal or no apparent order [18].
Puzzles surround the significance of columnar structure versus its absence, as well
as the functional significance of the neuron preferences. In animals with columnar visual
areas, organized orientation preferences are present at birth [19] without having required
exposure to visual stimuli, yet structure is not sustained in later development if the animal
is deprived of stimuli of any given orientation–cells with that preference being lost [ 20].
Particular difficulties surround the nature of ocular dominance columns. In some animals
with binocular vision these are organized in stripes in parts of the visual cortex that receive
inputs from both eyes. Orientation preferences surrounding their singularities form mirror
reflections between side-by-side columns, and between singularities above and below
in a single column [ 21]—exaggerating a tendency toward mirroring between adjacent
singularities much less apparent in the monocular cortex. Inputs from both eyes are
organized topographically, as a map of each eye’s visual field, with input from each eye
alternating, column by column, with that of the other. This hints strongly of a locus in
which comparisons can be made between each eye’s input, as required for binocular vision.
However, not all animals with binocular vision have ocular dominance columns. New
world owl monkeys provide a particularly difficult instance [22]. They have either very
poorly ordered, or absent, ocular dominance columns–yet it can be shown that they too
receive alternating inputs from their eyes as if dominance columns were present. These and
other findings have led to suggestions that columns are “spandrels”-viz: geometric forms
without necessary function [23]. The view taken in this paper is that the columns represent
one end of a spectrum of orderliness, but that a single organizational order underlies all.
Many theoretical formulations have been devised to account for limited aspects of
mesocortical organization, without any wide-ranging explanation having achieved uni-
versal acceptance. In contrast, the free energy principle and its relationship to the concept
of prediction error minimization, as advanced by Friston and colleagues [24–34] proposes
an overarching explanation for self-organizing systems, including brain function as a
specific instance. It draws parallels between laws of nature from the principle of least
action to the organization of artificial and real intelligence. A central concept is provided
by Jaynes’ linking of the maximum entropy principle of optimum statistical information
to the laws of thermodynamics, and, in a further step of unification, to Bayesian infer-
ence [26,27,35], so that these concepts are duals, each to the others. As an example of
such a duality, the interactions of coupled modes in a dynamical system are equivalent to
iterative models of grammar [36]. This means that a correct explanation of neuronal growth
and dynamics is de factoan explanation of information processing–a relationship Friston
terms “self-evidencing”; that neuronal and synaptic growth must tend inevitably toward a
stable state in which perturbations created by inputs are predicted from earlier learning,
and signals generated internally minimize the impact of uninformative current inputs on
ongoing activity. This balancing control of information exchanges is supposed to take place
Entropy 2024, 26, 287 3 of 17
both within the organism, and in its interactions with the environment. At an asymptotic
limit (although never reached in life) a state of perfect adaptation to the environment is
hypothetically attained.
Another way to express this process is that within any system with a boundary via
which it must interact with a surrounding environment, an open steady state must be
reached in which equal and opposite signals are continuously exchanged via the boundary,
so as to cancel each other. This boundary is termed by Friston a Markov blanket [ 37].
In neurophysiological terms this means at the asymptotic limit information exchanges
between brain and environment would correspond exactly to their mutual information,
and the variational free energy–effectively the uncertainty of the system–would be zero. A
mapping of all sensory and motor interactions with the environment onto the structure
of developed synaptic connectivity would have emerged, as pathways for neural signals
replicating all the ways the organism has learned to interact with the world.
Prediction error minimization and free energy minimization within a canonical model
of the cortical macrocolumn have been introduced within the structural model of the
cortex [38,39]. Here we provide a broader account, showing how growth processes and the
maintenance of excitatory/inhibitory balance result in a structure conforming to minimum
free energy and prediction error minimization, and suggesting a functional unity underlies
the paradoxical appearances in the anatomical findings outlined above.
This account is first formulated theoretically by considering the minimal properties
that must emerge as the neural field self-organizes in accord with the free energy principle.
We show that a particular anatomical order–one involving meso-scale mirror-symmetric
systems of synaptic connection, and Markov blankets–ought to emerge during early devel-
opment. Comparison is then made to outcomes of a biological growth model, itself matched
to experimental data. There is agreement between the two models, and in combination they
provide a provisional account of development and information processing in the neocortex.
2. Basic Considerations
2.1. Cells
Consistent with the structural model we assume that genetic determinants govern the
pathways of cell migration in embryogenesis, ultimately leading to the characteristic six
layered neocortex structure of excitatory and inhibitory neurons. Developing neurons oper-
ate close to metabolic limits imposed by their large surface area and high demands for ion
pumping [40]. Synapses are few compared to the number of contacts made between axons
and dendrites, so neurons form a sparse one-to-many network, with weak connectivity
per synapse [41,42]. Neurons make synaptic contacts preferentially with neighbours, since
dendritic and axonal trees are denser near their somas, but synaptic sparsity forces connec-
tion to jump intervening cells, so that closely placed neurons form densely interwoven and
interpenetrating networks.
2.2. Presynaptic Flux and Learning Rules
All neurons in the neural field exchange synaptic flux via all polysynaptic and monosy-
naptic routes to all other neurons. Peak synaptic flux delivered along all pathways of flow
is given by
φij

t + |i − j|
ν

= εij gij ρij Qj(t) (1)
where φij is the presynaptic flux received at the i − th neuron from the j − th neuron,
Qj is the pulse rate of the j − th neuron, υ is the speed of signal spread, and |i−j|
ν is the
delay from pulse generation to arrival of peak pulse density at presynapses, summed over
all routes. Synaptic gains are separated into three time-scales, so that εij , gij , ρij are the
transient synaptic efficacy, the slow dynamic synaptic gain, and the structural synapse
gains along the polysynaptic pathways, respectively. Synapses compete for resources on
all three time-scales. The Hebbian gain terms in Equation (1) follow the unification of
fast and slow synaptic learning rules proposed by Izhikevich and Desai [ 43] combining
Entropy 2024, 26, 287 4 of 17
rapid modification of synapses by short-term plasticity (STP) and short-term depression
(STD), with slower synaptic consolidation under the Bienenstock-Cooper-Monro (BCM)
rule, including the slow “floating hook” limitation of consolidation by negative feedback.
Following dendritic summation of presynaptic pulses, pulse generation follows a suitable
sigmoid function—the details of which are inessential to the following arguments.
2.3. Excitatory/Inhibitory Balance
Homeostatic mechanisms keep the firing rates of cortical neurons and the balance of
excitatory and inhibitory synaptic impulses within stable limits. Anti-Hebbian synaptic
plasticity [44], the mechanisms of which are not yet fully understood, acts to normalize
excitatory and inhibitory synaptic gains, while leaving the relative strengths of Hebbian
influences unchanged. Competitive metabolic processes may mediate the anti-Hebbian
effect, and, as observed experimentally, the time-course of anti-Hebbian plasticity is be-
tween hours and days. Yet rapid excitatory/inhibitory stabilization is essential, as attested
by the ease with which epilepsy can be triggered by local cortical irritation or photic
stimulation. The means by which ongoing rapid stabilization is maintained is key to our
following arguments.
3. A minimum Free Energy Organizational Unit
3.1. Rationale
Equation (1) can be re-written as a state equation for the neural field, in matrix/
vector form
Φ(t) = GDQ(t) (2)
Φ(t) is a matrix of unidirectional pre-synaptic flows, G(t) is a matrix of aggregate
presynaptic gains associated with each flow, D(t) is a delay matrix of axo-dendritic con-
duction times, and Q(t) is a vector of action potential pulse rates.
Φ(t) can be decomposed into spatial eigenmodes (patterns of synchronous and bidi-
rectionally symmetric flow), and asymmetric and variable fluxes coupling the spatial eigen-
modes into time-varying patterns. G(t) and D(t) are a description of synaptic strengths
and cell positions—with Φ(t) leading the development of the growth of synapses and cells.
By tracking development of Φ(t) we should arrive at descriptions of both neural system
dynamics, and the associated mesoanatomical order created by the consolidation of synap-
tic connections. This is first formulated theoretically by considering the minimal properties
that must emerge as the neural field self-organizes in accord with the free energy principle.
3.2. Constraints
Development is subject to three constraints:
Firstly, minimization of free energy:
F = A − C → 0 (3)
where F is variational free energy, A is total presynaptic flux autocorrelation, and C is
total presynaptic flux cross-correlation. These terms might also be read as Accuracy minus
Complexity—so that when variational free energy is minimized the activities of all members
of

φij (t)
	
can be reduced to probability densities among them. This in turn is equivalent
to optimization of Bayesian model evidence, and this is what is meant by the term self-
evidencing [26,27,35].
Secondly, minimization of perturbation from steady state, equivalent to prediction
error minimization:
∆Φ+(t) − ∆Φ−(t) → 0 (4)
where ∆Φ+(t) and ∆Φ−(t) are each other’s negative vector sums. At asymptote, each acts
to predict and minimize errors in the other. This constraint is here applied not only for
sensory and motor exchanges, but to exchanges in the neural field at all levels.
Entropy 2024, 26, 287 5 of 17
Thirdly, maintenance of excitatory/inhibitory balance:
∑φe → ∑φi → constancy (5)
where ∑ φe is the total excitatory presynaptic flux, and ∑ φi is the total inhibitory presynap-
tic flux. This supplies a steady-state constraint that cell pulse rates remain stationary in the
main, as development proceeds.
3.3. Minimization of Free Energy, F→ 0
At each stage of growth, although there are an increasing number, n, of unidirec-
tional flows of presynaptic flux as synaptic and cell numbers are increasing, the total
autocorrelation, A, during a relatively short epoch, T, at all lags, τ, is
A = 1
2T
n
∑
ij
Z T
0
Z +∞
−∞
φij (t)φij (t − τ)dτdt (6)
and for the n
2 pairs of bidirectional flows, total cross-correlation, C, is
C = 1
T
n
2
∑
ij,ji
Z T
0
Z +∞
−∞
φij (t)φji(t − τ)dτdt (7)
Therefore free energy (flux autocorrelation and crosscorrelation have units of power,
not energy, but in reference to open exchanges across a Markov blanket, are referred to as
energies.) is zero when for all i, j, t, τ,
φij (t)φij (t − τ) + φji(t)φji(t − τ) = φij (t)φji(t − τ) + φji(t)φij (t − τ) (8)
Equation (8) describes ongoing variations of synaptic flux as the neural field interacts
with imposed signals via a Markov blanket. On arithmetical grounds these variations
require that at least one term φij is equal to a term φji at each time-step, creating trajectories
about an absolute equilibrium. At this equilibrium all four terms are equal, energy is
equipartitioned, excitatory or inhibitory fluxes between all pairs of cells are bidirectionally
symmetrical, and the system is time-stationary and may be periodic. This equilibrium con-
dition, when applied to all combinations of interactions between excitatory and inhibitory
cells, corresponds to zero-lag synchronous oscillation [45]. For exchanges between pairs of
excitatory cells, or between pairs of inhibitory cells, with τ = 0, excitatory or inhibitory
populations of neurons fire synchronously and exchange bidirectionally symmetrical flux.
In exchanges between excitatory and inhibitory cells the inhibitory flux can be regarded as
the negation of excitatory flux. Therefore, for τ = |i − j|/ν (half the period of oscillation)
excitatory and inhibitory cells fire in anti-phase with effectively the same symmetrical flux
exchange. The collective effect of the exchanges is zero-lag synchronous oscillation, and
under small perturbations the oscillating equilibrium is stable. Fields of synchrony are
spatial eigenmodes of Φ(t).
Conversely asymmetric exchanges of flux can mediate time-varying eigenmode
couplings—that is, the control of perturbations about synchronous oscillation. The per-
turbations associated with eigenmode coupling necessarily become both minimal and
efficient, analogous to the minimal pdV work in thermodynamic systems as pressure and
temperature differentials settle to stability. Leading to:
3.4. Minimization of Prediction Error,∆Φ+(t) − ∆Φ−(t) → 0
Symmetric exchanges of flux at equilibrium meet the condition by definition. Asym-
metric exchanges must evolve to become paired so that each one of a pair generates a flux
oppositely directed to the other as closely as possible—yet these cannot be between the
same cells. This requires dual systems of connection, one system the mirror image of the
other, and since these connections must mediate coupling between spatial eigenmodes
Entropy 2024, 26, 287 6 of 17
rather than simply blocking eigenmode interactions, the eigenmodes themselves must
occur as duplicates with mirror-symmetry.
3.5. Excitatory/Inhibitory Balance,∑ φe → ∑ φi → Constancy
Synchronous equilibrium itself requires equal exchange between excitatory and in-
hibitory neurons. If the entire field is to remain in balance, parts of the field in excess
excitation must interact with parts of the field in excess inhibition, and vice-versa. There-
fore each of the systems of coupled eigenmodes in a mirrored pair must interact with its
partner to establish joint excitatory/inhibitory balance—necessarily requiring collision of
travelling waves in the neural field—as follows.
3.6. Interactions within and between Spatial Eigenmodes
Figure 1 shows the four possible ways that adjacent areas in a neural field, each area
part of a spatial eigenmode organization, can interact. In the middle column blocks of
interacting excitatory and inhibitory cells constituting spatial eigenmodes are shown cross
connected by excitatory links. The cross-connections shown are those of medium or long-
range connections, and are excitatory only. Short-range inhibitory cross-links would also
be capable of mediating analogous effects to those next described, but are here ignored
for simplicity.
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 19 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Exchanges between spatial eigenm odes. The grey squares marked ݁and ݅represent 
clusters of excitatory and inhibitory  neurons whose interaction generates a ﬁeld of synchronous 
oscillation (a spatial eigenmode). Bridging between the synchronous systems, excitatory presynap-
ses link to either the excitatory cells or the inhibitory cells in the neighbouring assembly, and do so 
either symmetrically or asymmetrically. Approxim ate aggregate pulse cross-correlations between 
assemblies of excitatory cells in each of the paired eigenmodes are shown on the right. 
3.7. Redundancy and Information Storage 
The hypothetical mirror-symmetric connection systems require a 2:1 redundancy of 
the information storage in their synapses. Using the Nyquist and Shannon-Hartley theo-
rems, and considering ݊directed synaptic couplings as unit-valued and composed of ܵ 
synapses that have been shaped by learni ng, with the remainder considered random ab 
initio. Thus 
ܵ
݊= ܥ
ܣ≤ 1 (9)
is a synaptic signal/noise ratio, and 
ܦ= ଶ ൬1+ܵ
݊൰ (10)
is the number of bits needed to specify the information stored in the synaptic couplings.  
If the information input to the system is smaller by a factor ܯthan the synaptic stor-
age capacity, then any one of 2஽/ܯdistinct inputs can be stored redundantly, as ݊ܵ⁄→ 
1, learning approaches asymptote, and free energy zero. This provides a further condition, 
≥ 2, for the emergence of paired mirror symmetric systems. 
  
Figure 1. Exchanges between spatial eigenmodes. The grey squares marked e and i represent clusters
of excitatory and inhibitory neurons whose interaction generates a field of synchronous oscillation (a
spatial eigenmode). Bridging between the synchronous systems, excitatory presynapses link to either
the excitatory cells or the inhibitory cells in the neighbouring assembly, and do so either symmetrically
or asymmetrically. Approximate aggregate pulse cross-correlations between assemblies of excitatory
cells in each of the paired eigenmodes are shown on the right.
In the top row, interaction is symmetrical and excitatory, maximizing co-synchrony
while increasing total excitation. In the second row interaction is symmetrical and in-
hibitory, in which case equal and opposite components in the colliding waves are cancelled,
permitting co-synchrony with reduction of total excitation. Asymmetric interactions shown
in the remaining two rows mediate eigenmode cross-coupling, with an increase or reduction
in total excitation respectively.
Entropy 2024, 26, 287 7 of 17
3.7. Redundancy and Information Storage
The hypothetical mirror-symmetric connection systems require a 2:1 redundancy of the
information storage in their synapses. Using the Nyquist and Shannon-Hartley theorems,
and considering n directed synaptic couplings as unit-valued and composed of S synapses
that have been shaped by learning, with the remainder considered random ab initio. Thus
S
n = C
A ≤ 1 (9)
is a synaptic signal/noise ratio, and
D = nlog 2

1 + S
n

(10)
is the number of bits needed to specify the information stored in the synaptic couplings.
If the information input to the system is smaller by a factorM than the synaptic storage
capacity, then any one of 2D/M distinct inputs can be stored redundantly, as S/n → 1,
learning approaches asymptote, and free energy zero. This provides a further condition,
M ≥ 2, for the emergence of paired mirror symmetric systems.
3.8. Mirror Symmetric Fields and Markov Blankets
Applying the mechanisms in Figure 1, Figure 2 illustrates a system composed of a pair
of mirror-symmetric coupled spatial eigenmodes, each of the pair generating oppositely
directed, colliding, travelling waves. The diagram shows the topology of the connections
and flux exchanges—not a specific topography in the form shown. It is the synaptic
connectivity that is essential, so the twin eigenmode systems might be separated by some
distance, or their cell soma positions might be interdigitated.
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 19 
 
 
3.8. Mirror Symmetric Fields and Markov Blankets 
Applying the mechanisms in Figure 1, Figu re 2 illustrates a system composed of a 
pair of mirror-symmetric coupled spatial eigenmodes, each of the pair generating oppo-
sitely directed, colliding, travelling waves. The diagram shows the topology of the con-
nections and ﬂux exchanges—not a speci ﬁc topography in the form shown. It is the syn-
aptic connectivity that is essential, so the twin eigenmode systems might be separated by 
some distance, or their cell soma positions might be interdigitated.  
 
Figure 2. The topology of neural ﬁeld interactions meeting requirements for minimization of free 
energy, minimization of prediction errors, and maintenance of excitatory/inhibitory balance. Paired 
mirror-symmetric systems of coupled spatial eige nmodes (arbitrarily represented as yin-yang ﬁg-
ures) each interact internally via excitatory and inhibitory cross-couplings (solid and dashed black 
lines) generating oppositely directed travelling waves (colored arrows), that collide at the double 
dashed line. 
Excitatory/inhibitory stabilization can take place at the line of wave collision, since 
excess of excitation or of inhibition in waves from either side can be compensated at a fast 
time scale by shift between the symmetrical excitation and symmetrical inhibition modes 
of coupling-shifts modulated by the negative feedback “ ﬂoating hook” property of the 
BCM rule, which diminishes synaptic gain in the more driven synapses. Adaptation may 
then be mediated more slowly by other cellular mechanisms of anti-Hebbian plasticity. 
As junctional exchange manages excitatory/i nhibitory balance, prediction error minimi-
zation proceeds within each of the mirror du als, and free energy approaches zero. The 
signals arriving at the junction progressively maximize their mutual information. The mir-
ror-like junction is therefore a Markov blanket, in Fristons sense. 
Interaction of dual systems can be generalized to multi-way interactions throughout 
the cortex, as continuously changing synaptic eﬃcacies (Equation (1)) modulate and seg-
regate the patterns of pulses and synaptic ﬂux present at any one instant, achieving mini-
mization of prediction errors in all exchanges. At a whole-brain scale, such a system is also 
suited to minimize prediction error in interaction with subcortical systems and the exter-
nal milieu—thus forming a large-scale Markov  blanket between cortex and subcortex.  
Figure 2. The topology of neural field interactions meeting requirements for minimization of free
energy, minimization of prediction errors, and maintenance of excitatory/inhibitory balance. Paired
mirror-symmetric systems of coupled spatial eigenmodes (arbitrarily represented as yin-yang fig-
ures) each interact internally via excitatory and inhibitory cross-couplings (solid and dashed black
lines) generating oppositely directed travelling waves (colored arrows), that collide at the double
dashed line.
Entropy 2024, 26, 287 8 of 17
Excitatory/inhibitory stabilization can take place at the line of wave collision, since
excess of excitation or of inhibition in waves from either side can be compensated at a fast
time scale by shift between the symmetrical excitation and symmetrical inhibition modes
of coupling-shifts modulated by the negative feedback “floating hook” property of the
BCM rule, which diminishes synaptic gain in the more driven synapses. Adaptation may
then be mediated more slowly by other cellular mechanisms of anti-Hebbian plasticity. As
junctional exchange manages excitatory/inhibitory balance, prediction error minimization
proceeds within each of the mirror duals, and free energy approaches zero. The signals
arriving at the junction progressively maximize their mutual information. The mirror-like
junction is therefore a Markov blanket, in Friston’s sense.
Interaction of dual systems can be generalized to multi-way interactions through-
out the cortex, as continuously changing synaptic efficacies (Equation (1)) modulate and
segregate the patterns of pulses and synaptic flux present at any one instant, achieving
minimization of prediction errors in all exchanges. At a whole-brain scale, such a system
is also suited to minimize prediction error in interaction with subcortical systems and the
external milieu—thus forming a large-scale Markov blanket between cortex and subcortex.
4. Emergence of Mirrored Synaptic Maps in Actual Anatomy
It must now be shown whether dual mirror-and-blanket systems can be identified in
cortical mesoanatomy, and explained how their development takes place.
The preceding argument showed that as free energy is minimized, maximization of
synchrony is a consequence. In biological terms the converse argument is more easily made
with regard to the neocortex. Synchronous firing appears early in neuronal development
along with the development of small world connectivity [ 46]. A substantial fraction of
developing neurons succumb to apoptosis [47], and those neurons prevented from entering
into synchrony succumb to apoptosis [ 48,49]. The surviving cells thus form a matrix
maximizing synchronous oscillation. A second factor in cell selection, minimization of
total axonal length, lowering metabolic demand in the surviving cells, will assist their
survival [40], and favour the evolution of a small-world configuration [7,50].
4.1. Columnar versus Noncolumnar Cortex
It is useful to first explain how, in this model, the difference between columnar versus
noncolumnar cortex comes about. Simulation of cortical development [ 51] shows small
world selection and selection for maximum synchrony can be in conflict. It is the relative
length of long and short axon neurons included in the simulation that determines whether
clearly columnar, or apparently diffuse, non-columnar organization results. Suppose two
populations of cortical neurons, with axonal tree distributions
ρα = Nαλαexp[−λαx] (11)
ρβ = Nβλβexp

−λβx

(12)
where ρα (x), ρβ(x) are respective normalized densities of the axonal trees of long-axon, α
cells, and short-axon, β cells, as a function of distance, x, from their cell somas. The fraction
of presynapses generated by the two cell types are Nα, Nβ, and λα, λβ, are their axonal
inverse length constants.
Bidirectional connection density, ρα+β, for all cells would be a maximum if
ρα+β(x) = Nαλαexp[−λαx] + Nβλβexp

−λβx

(13)
whereas density of connection in an ultra-small world network [ 52] where inter-soma
distance is surrogate for increasing order of neighbour separation, is given byρα+β(x + k)−2.
Entropy 2024, 26, 287 9 of 17
Thus, disparity of connection density, ∆(x), of an ultra-small world system and that of the
axonal trees of α and β cells is at best
∆(x) = (x + k)−2 −
 
Nαλαexp[−λαx] + Nβλβexp

−λβx

(14)
and competitive processes maximizing synchrony (see below) force further departures in
separation of cell bodies from the ultra-small optimum.
Simulations of cortical growth presumed that the axonal tree lengths are genetically
determined and that the numbers of cells in the two populations are selected so as to opti-
mize both synchrony and small world connectivity. For higher and more equal values ofλα
and λβ ultra-small world order is most closely approximated, therefore predominates, and
columnar definition is not apparent. Where λα ≪ λβ, maximization of synchrony among
the numerous short-axon neurons is the predominant influence, and clearly columnar
organization results. The loss of definition in the noncolumnar instances arises from the
merging and inter-weaving of cell networks, made possible by the sparsity of synaptic
connectivity. Whether apparently columnar or diffuse, simulations show that the same
patterns of synaptic connections best maximizing synchrony are present, but are organized
in interdigitated overlapping systems where small-world organization has predominated.
As is later explained, Figure 3, bottom right, illustrates the way this merging takes place.
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 19 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Organization of cortical columns. Left: Reco nstruction showing disposition of cells and 
synapses for maximum synchrony in a surface-oblique view of a column. Large coloured neurons 
represent superﬁcial patch cells. Black and white smaller cells are local short-axon excitatory cells. 
Small coloured spheres represent presynapses eﬀerent from patch cells of the same colour. (Return 
bidirectional synaptic connections not shown.). Si milar synaptic self-organization is shown in the 
deeper layers of the column. Right top left: A subset of local cells from the reconstruction are shown 
in isolation, indicating the way that interpenetrati on of networks of local cells is a consequence of 
sparsity of connection. Black and white colouration is arbitrary other than to indicate the interweav-
ing. Occasional cross-links, shown as dashed blac k and white, bridge the sparse networks, and re-
sult in ampliﬁcation of synchrony in closed loops. Right top right: An abstract representation of the 
networks right top, showing the cells as arrayed in a closed loop conﬁguration analogous to a Mo-
bius strip. Coloured dots and swaths of colour show how presynapses from patch cells are deployed 
to maximize co-resonance between local and patch cells. Right bo ttom: Two views of adjacent col-
umns. On the left is the arrangement in columnar neocortex. Columns abut, but do not overlap, and 
synaptic organization is mirrored between columns. On the right, the arrangement in noncolumnar 
cortex. The two columns are interpenetrating, permitted by the sparsity of connections, and there is 
no diﬀerence in synaptic organization—but small-wo rld organization has predominated over max-
imum synchrony organization.
 
It is emphasized that in the following account, the description of emerging pa tterns 
of synaptic connection is to considered gene ral throughout cortex, although comparison 
with the clearly columnar visual cortex (V1) , for many years the focus of experimental 
study, enables more direct comparison between theory and experiment.  
4.2. Early Embryonic Development 
At the earliest stage developing synaptic connections are initially random, and poly-
synaptic pathways between any two neurons develop as cells and synapses proliferate, 
Figure 3. Organization of cortical columns. Left: Reconstruction showing disposition of cells and
synapses for maximum synchrony in a surface-oblique view of a column. Large coloured neurons
represent superficial patch cells. Black and white smaller cells are local short-axon excitatory cells.
Small coloured spheres represent presynapses efferent from patch cells of the same colour. (Return
bidirectional synaptic connections not shown.). Similar synaptic self-organization is shown in the
Entropy 2024, 26, 287 10 of 17
deeper layers of the column. Right top left: A subset of local cells from the reconstruction are shown
in isolation, indicating the way that interpenetration of networks of local cells is a consequence of
sparsity of connection. Black and white colouration is arbitrary other than to indicate the interweaving.
Occasional cross-links, shown as dashed black and white, bridge the sparse networks, and result
in amplification of synchrony in closed loops. Right top right: An abstract representation of the
networks right top, showing the cells as arrayed in a closed loop configuration analogous to a Mobius
strip. Coloured dots and swaths of colour show how presynapses from patch cells are deployed to
maximize co-resonance between local and patch cells. Right bottom: Two views of adjacent columns.
On the left is the arrangement in columnar neocortex. Columns abut, but do not overlap, and synaptic
organization is mirrored between columns. On the right, the arrangement in noncolumnar cortex.
The two columns are interpenetrating, permitted by the sparsity of connections, and there is no
difference in synaptic organization—but small-world organization has predominated over maximum
synchrony organization.
It is emphasized that in the following account, the description of emerging patterns of
synaptic connection is to considered general throughout cortex, although comparison with
the clearly columnar visual cortex (V1), for many years the focus of experimental study,
enables more direct comparison between theory and experiment.
4.2. Early Embryonic Development
At the earliest stage developing synaptic connections are initially random, and polysy-
naptic pathways between any two neurons develop as cells and synapses proliferate,
bringing about polysynaptic flows that are roughly bidirectionally symmetrical between
all cells, so synchrony is early apparent in developing cells, as they begin to associate
into small world systems [46]. Bidirectional monosynaptic connections begin to develop,
preferentially selected out of the polysynaptic flow between neurons, further increasing
magnitude of synchrony.
As previously described, for simplicity we treat distribution of axonal lengths in the
developing cells as two populations—one of excitatory cells with long axons, and a short
axon population of mixed excitatory and inhibitory cells [53].
At a distance, X, from their cell bodies, the population density of the axonal trees of
the short-axon and long axon cell populations are equal.
X =
−ln

Nαλα
Nβλβ

λβ−λα
(15)
The short-axon, β, cells whose axonal density is greatest at short range, preferentially
form densest connections with each other at distances less than X, clustering into columnar-
like systems. The long axon, α, cells form preferential connections in patches where their
cell bodies are closely situated, and because of competitive exclusion by β cell synapse
formation, form other preferential long-range connections at distances greater than X—so
that patches of α cells form with skipping connections at lengths that are multiples of X, in
a grid with edges of length X, enclosing clusters of short-axon cells. This reproduces the
superficial patch cell network.
The long axon cells and short axon cells exchange bidirectional monosynaptic connec-
tions at distance X. The upshot is that within each cluster the short-axon cells and their
surrounding patches of long-axon cells project synapses to each other 1:1, maximizing syn-
chrony by creating swaths of connection in arcs of a circle (in two dimensions) or segments
of a spherical surface (in three dimensions) of radius X. Again because of synaptic sparsity,
the formation of 1:1 maps is not confined to a simple Euclidean projection, but can project
from the clusters of α cells to separate, interpenetrating, parts of the enclosed β networks
as the Rheimann projection that will best maximize joint synchrony. Positions in the α-cell
network can be considered as global positions in the cortical area, and designated complex
Entropy 2024, 26, 287 11 of 17
number positions, P, while positions in any of the localβ-cell clusters are designated p. (The
complex plane positions may be further generalised to positions in three dimensions, as
required.). As bidirectional monosynaptic connections emerge, they result in global-to-local
maps of the form
P ↔ p where p= ±
√
−1k (P − p0)n
|P − p0|n−1 + p0 (16)
(P − p0)n/|P − p0|n−1 describes angular multiplication by n in the projection from P
to p. The factor
√−1k defines the rotation by 90 degrees and scale of the projection created
by the arcs of synapses. Chirality is shown + or −, and p0 is the centre of a short-axon β
cell cluster. This is a mirror-mapping in a topological sense—the global field being reflected
in each local map. Figure 3 left shows a reconstruction of these synaptic projections in the
upper, and in the lower, layers of a developing column.
The value of n also represents the number of turns about the β cell cluster centre
made by sparse and interpenetrating β cell networks before they form a closed self-exciting
system, and the global-to-local projection must match the closed loop conformation in the
form best maximizing synchrony. The projection of α cells to β cells from diametrically
opposite sides of a local map, each at range X, forces their synapses to be deployed in
arcs radiating from the local maps center—either deployed on opposite sides of the map
center—in which case n = 1—or both radiating from the center on the same side—in which
case n = 2. The n = 1 case is a simple Euclidean mapping, whereas n = 2 is a mapping
analogous to the mapping of a plane onto a Mobius strip. The latter arrangement permits
greater total synchrony by dint of the longer chains of connection among the sparse, but
cross-connected, β cell networks. Angles in the global field from 0 − π are mapped locally
from 0 − 2π in the plane view of the column, while global angles from π − 2π are also
mapped (on a separate mesh of cells) from 0 − 2π in the same view, creating the form of
an orientation preference singularity. Figure 3 top right shows how connections in the
interpenetrating nets of sparsely connected cells can be construed in this way.
By forming mirror symmetry arrangement of adjacent local maps, homologous po-
sitions in the projections from the global map are brought into highest contiguity—thus
enabling them to form connections further maximizing their joint synchrony. That is
pA ↔ pB where pA = +√−1k (P−p0A)2
|P−p0A| + p0A
and pB = −√−1k (P−p0B)2
|P−p0B| + p0B
(17)
A and B indicate adjacent local maps (columns). The arrangement may be discrete and
columnar, or the adjacent maps may themselves be interpenetrating to variable degree in
noncolumnar cortex, as shown bottom right in Figure 3—synchrony will still be maximized.
Similarly, maps can form at different depths on the six-layered cortex. As these form
in layers, each similarly oriented with regard to the surrounding global map, they are
arranged in mirror symmetry in the axis of cortical depth.
Experimental findings explained by this model include patch cell clustering and
interpatch order, the organization of orientation preference (OP) in monocular areas of
V1 including OP singularities, linear zones, and saddle points, and in binocular ocular
dominance (OD) columns—also explaining the “like-to-like” connections made by patch
cells to short-axon cells with common OP preference in separate local maps.
A critical test of this explanation of the organization of OP maps [53] was passed in
the simulation of variation of OP when measured using moving visual lines with differing
angle of attack, line length, and stimulus speed [54]—a finding explained by lag times of
conduction in lateral intracortical connections. This distinguishes the present model from
feedforward, self-organizing map, and dimension reduction models of OP organization.
Although the two contrasted model types are compatible, pure feedforward supposes only
fixed feature representations and does not include effects of lateral contextual interactions.
Entropy 2024, 26, 287 12 of 17
A separate consideration applies to formation of mirror assemblies maximizing joint
synchrony as cortico-cortical connections develop, creating inter-area linkage. Cortico-
cortical projections form U-shaped loops in cortical white matter, projecting from one
cortical area to its neighbours with mirror symmetry, and with subsequent onward projec-
tions to further cortical areas creating observable recurrent reversals of map chirality [55].
This can be accounted for as a simple consequence of the form of the fibre projections [56]
although the complexity of interareal connections and hierarchies obscures the effect in
some cases.
Thus a multitude of mirror systems can tile the cortex, as adjacent columns, as interpen-
etrating sparse systems equivalent to columns, or as systems separated but interconnected
by cortico-cortical connections. They can be mirrored in layers of cortical depth, with each
layer laterally mirrored. They form mirrors between scales, as the patch system projects
to each column or its non-columnar equivalent, and as mirrors between entire cortical
areas. (Figure 4). These alternative ways in which mirrors can be arranged form the set of
topographies that can be created within neocortex, each corresponding to the topology of
the theoretical unit in Figure 2.
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 19 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Summary representation of all the ways mi rror representations arise. Double black 
dashed lines indicate lines of mirror symmetry, and putative Markov blankets. Red and blue arrows 
indicate presynaptic ﬂows toward lines of symmetry. ( a) Cortico-cortical and Inter-areal connec-
tions. Their U-shaped form projec ts each cortical area to its ne ighbours with mirror symmetry. ( b) 
Each local map interacts with the global map with (topological) mirror symmetry, as the local short-
axon neurons exchange ﬂux with the surrounding cortex  via the patch cell system. ( c) Local cell 
groups interact with adjacent groups of opposite chirality—whether the groups interpenetrate, abut, 
or are further separated. ( d) Within every column mirror symmetry is generated between layers, 
while also able to interact laterally with other mirrored systems. 
4.3. Later Embryonic and Early Antenatal Development 
Early in antenatal life sensory a ﬀerents reach the cortex [57] and eventually impose 
complicated temporal structure on the inputs to the cortex, replacing the earlier stochastic 
exchanges. The radially symmetric mirror structures are now able to act as a scaﬀold upon 
which spatiotemporal images can be stored and read out. 
4.3.1. Spatiotemporal Images 
As an external stimulus is imposed upon the cortex, signals relayed intracortically 
from the global to the local scales, arrive in neighbouring macrocolumns within a short 
epoch. Concurrent arrivals at closely situated neurons generated from diﬀerent positions 
Figure 4. Summary representation of all the ways mirror representations arise. Double black dashed
lines indicate lines of mirror symmetry, and putative Markov blankets. Red and blue arrows indicate
presynaptic flows toward lines of symmetry. (a) Cortico-cortical and Inter-areal connections. Their
U-shaped form projects each cortical area to its neighbours with mirror symmetry. (b) Each local map
interacts with the global map with (topological) mirror symmetry, as the local short-axon neurons
exchange flux with the surrounding cortex via the patch cell system. (c) Local cell groups interact
with adjacent groups of opposite chirality—whether the groups interpenetrate, abut, or are further
separated. (d) Within every column mirror symmetry is generated between layers, while also able to
interact laterally with other mirrored systems.
Entropy 2024, 26, 287 13 of 17
4.3. Later Embryonic and Early Antenatal Development
Early in antenatal life sensory afferents reach the cortex [57] and eventually impose
complicated temporal structure on the inputs to the cortex, replacing the earlier stochastic
exchanges. The radially symmetric mirror structures are now able to act as a scaffold upon
which spatiotemporal images can be stored and read out.
4.3.1. Spatiotemporal Images
As an external stimulus is imposed upon the cortex, signals relayed intracortically from
the global to the local scales, arrive in neighbouring macrocolumns within a short epoch.
Concurrent arrivals at closely situated neurons generated from different positions and
different times in the global field are able to promote synchrony and secondary formation
of synapses between the local cells. It can be shown [58] that this can result in the storage
in the local map of the representation of a moving image P,

t − |P−p|
υ

→ p(t). This
provides the basis of variation of OP with stimulus velocity and orientation mentioned
above. Representations formed in this manner can differ in the information about the
object represented. Information from widespread positions in the global field would
better represent movement than shape, and from positions closely situated in the global
field, the shape of the object. This may account for representations higher in the cortical
hierarchy specializing in differing types of visual information—the dorsal and ventral
visual streams [59].
Chains of such images would store more complicated sequences, and in motor cortex,
reversal of the processes could be read out as spatiotemporal motor outputs.
4.3.2. Coupled Spatial Eigenmodes, Spatial and Temporal Frequency Preferences
The process generating spatiotemporal images is equivalent to the generation of
coupled spatial eigenmodes, and explains other response preferences of V1 neurons [59].
Signals from positions in the global field circumferentially arrayed with respect to local
maps generate a high frequency response in the local cells, in contrast to the lower frequency
of responses elicited from radially positioned inputs. Synchronous fields thus generated are
preferentially tuned to high frequencies and arrayed circumferentially within local maps,
or tuned to low frequencies and arrayed radially. Adjacent circumferential high frequency
domains are readily coupled by unidirectional excitatory couplings, as are adjacent radial
low frequency domains—but the orthogonal disposition and poor frequency matching of
high and low frequency domains leads them to be mutually antagonistic via their inhibitory
surrounds. These properties account for the spatial (SFP) and temporal (TFP) frequency
preferences of local cells [17,60]. High SFP cells (HSFP) occur most commonly in linear
zones near the circumferential perimeter of macrocolumns. Low SFP (LSFP) zones are
more scattered and radially located. At OP singularities either an HSFP domain or an
LSFP domain is located-interpreted as competitive conflict forcing one or other outcome.
Temporal frequency preferences (TFP) are accounted for along with SFP , since it is known
that TFP = stimulus velocity × SFP [61]—as expected for intracortical laterally spreading
signals. HSFP/HTFP and LSFP/LTFP zones thus appear to reveal the existence of coupled
spatial eigenmodes on each macrocolumn.
Adjacent macrocolumns must receive inputs from the global field that are from the
same stimulus, translated in space and time. Since the scaffold structure of each macro-
column approximates a mirror reflection of its neighbours, adjacent macrocolumns could
interact with each other as envisaged in Figure 2, with the line of junction acting as a Markov
blanket. By reaching a co-synchronous stable exchange, they would have abstracted and
stored wider general characteristics of the stimulus object’s shape and movement.
5. Conclusions
5.1. The Logical Structure of Our Argument
We have shown that application of the free energy principle to a simple but realistic
neural field leads to a theoretical unit of self-organization, constructed of mirrored assem-
Entropy 2024, 26, 287 14 of 17
blies of synaptic connections, and separated by a Markov blanket. On the other hand,
simulations of development in the neocortex lead to a compatible outcome—with provisos.
The conflicting demands of maximized synchrony versus small-world organization mean
that the outcome of growth simulations is expressed in the simplest topographic relation
to the theoretical unit only in columnar cortex. The sparsity of all neuronal connections
accounts for the way a single unit of synaptic organization can be masked by the inter-
penetration of separated networks. In a related way, sparsity of connection accounts for
the form of OP singularities and the Mobius strip-like form that the mirrored assemblies
must take.
This means that our argument is limited by the fact that the ubiquity of paired mirror
representations is inferred rather than directly demonstrated, and even in the relatively
clear case of mirror organization of OP seen in OD columns, this is an interpretation of
the underlying connections rather than direct visualization. However, the growth model
has wide explanatory power, greater than any preceding model, for findings in the visual
cortex—notably accounting for the topographic organization of OP , SFP , TFP , and like-to-
like connections, and also reproducing the dynamic variations of OP with object speed and
angle. It explains why OP maps are apparent at birth, since emergence of these structures
requires only noise-like driving, and only a radially symmetrical structure appears at that
stage. Likewise, it also accounts for the results of postnatal visual deprivation, since it
requires ongoing post-natal learning to overwrite the radially organized antenatal scaffold.
Therefore there can be some confidence in the growth model’s validity, and the growth
simulation outcomes show that it is logically consistent to extend the model to the neocortex
in general.
5.2. The Properties of the Theoretical Unit—Internal Markov Blankets
The theoretical unit, derived directly from the free energy principle, makes explicit an
extra property not obvious from the growth model alone—the development of a Markov
blanket between each pair of mirror-ordered connections. Opposed signals are not brought
directly into matching interaction, but their cumulative effects on eigenmode coupling
within each of the mirror assembly pair are brought to excitatory/inhibitory balance at
the line of mirror junction, and thus mutual information between the mirror pairs is
maximized. This has major functional implications, introducing local stabilization and
the interplay of extensive co-synchrony with prediction error minimization throughout
the neural field, at all scales and in cortical depth. Error minimization is not restricted to
particular special systems, as in the canonical model of error minimization. Overall, error
minimization proceeds in a fully distributed fashion and provides a universal mechanism
for the abstraction and storage of common features in cortical interactions at all scales.
This can be illustrated by explanation of the enigmatic relationship of OD columns
to binocular fusion in different species. In the more straightforward case in which OD
columns are present, laterally adjacent OD columns, interacting via a Markov blanket while
each receiving an input from the visual field from opposite eyes, can achieve maximum
mutual information with each other, while similarly interacting with mirror assembles
higher and lower within each column. Maximization of their joint mutual information
utilizes effects of perspective to create a representation equivalent to a 3D image. Yet the
synaptic organization achieving this effect does not depend on specific columnar order,
and could exist perfectly well if the cell bodies composing the columns were intermingled.
It is the synaptic topology that is important. Thus species without cortical columns in
V1 can still have 3D vision, because they have separated inputs from each eye in OD-
like conformation.
5.3. Generalization to Development and Function beyond the Neocortex
The developmental growth model is cast in terms of neocortical self-organization,
with long-range excitatory connections and simplified intrinsic axonal ranges emphasized.
This begs the question of integration of neocortical and subcortical systems not only as
Entropy 2024, 26, 287 15 of 17
pathways of sensory and motor interactions with environment, but in the regulation of
cortical arousal and attentional focus, and of reinforcement. These aspects have been given
brief attention in regard to the growth model [62].
A further question is whether the development of mirror symmetric synaptic systems
with intervening Markov blankets may be applicable more widely, to neurogenesis in
general—and more particularly might be applicable to the paleo- and archicortical pro-
genitors of the neocortex in the structural model. A wider unification by amalgamation
with analyses of limbic neocortical relations [ 5,6] might then be possible. As the cortex
emerges by differentiation from cells of limbic origin, during its growth it might be brought,
by the same process of predictive error minimization, into harmony with the developing
limbic and subcortical systems, while concurrently more direct exchanges of neocortex and
environment via major sensory and motor pathways develop.
There appears no restriction to developing further growth models along these lines.
Oscillation occurs, and can be modelled in other brain systems with wholly different
synaptic architecture and fiber ranges—e.g., olfactory cortex [63]. The theoretical account
of development of mirror systems with intervening mirror blankets is wholly general,
subject only to the listed constraints, so specifics of connectivity will affect the topographies
of connection, not their topology. It may be assumed that the same selective processes
could operate among neural precursors with widely different genetic variations in available
cell types. Although the growth model depends upon selection by apoptosis of synapses
and cell positions maximizing zero-lag synchrony, it is unclear whether this is the only
selection that might apply widely in the brain—or, indeed, in the neocortex itself. The
maximization of zero-lag synchrony is not a unique pathway to minimum variational free
energy. In other circumstances paired mirror systems organized into limit cycles, or chaotic
attractor systems, are theoretically possible, and could occur in any neural system in which
prediction error minimization was an essential attribute.
5.4. Testing and Cellular Mechanisms
The growth model is subject to further testing on a rather grand, but definitive level.
Connectivity analysis in both columnar and noncolumnar cortex ought to establish that
linkages of patch cells and short axon cell clusters are similar in both types-discrete in
columnar cortex, and overlapping in noncolumnar cortex. At the same detailed microscopic
level, it should be possible to demonstrate that within short-axon clusters like-to-like
connections terminate in a Mobius-like manner, on the interpenetrating and intertwined
short-axon local cell networks.
Integration of this model with mechanisms of anti-Hebbian plasticity, synaptogenesis,
apoptosis, and the role of neural energetics, needs to be further demonstrated or disproved,
when further advances in these fields permit. Finally, it may be remarked that large-scale
chip emulations of neurons in mirror arrays may be practicable, and might then provide an
anatomically realistic framework in which to explore unsupervised learning.
Author Contributions: J.W. devised and wrote the manuscript. P .B. was responsible for software and
graphics. Both authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version. All authors
have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The original contributions presented in the study are included in the
article, further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author.
Acknowledgments: This work arose from long-term support including the Frank Hixon Fund of the
California Institute of Technology, the MHRF, and Wellcome Trust in the UK, the United Kingdom,
New Zealand, and Australian Medical Research Councils, and the Oakley, and Pratt Foundations of
Australasia. We also acknowledge the contributions of our families and colleagues.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Entropy 2024, 26, 287 16 of 17
References
1. Barbas, H. Pattern in the laminar origin of corticocortical connections. J. Comp. Neurol.1986, 252, 415–422. [CrossRef]
2. Barbas, H.; Rempel-Clower, N. Cortical structure predicts the pattern of corticocortical connections. Cereb. Cortex1997, 7, 635–646.
[CrossRef]
3. Barbas, H. General cortical and special prefrontal connections: Principles from structure to function. Annu. Rev. Neurosci.2015,
38, 269–289. [CrossRef]
4. García-Cabezas, M.; Zikopoulos, B.; Barbas, H. The structural model: A theory linking connections, plasticity, pathology,
development and evolution of the cerebral cortex. Anat. Embryol.2019, 224, 985–1008. [CrossRef]
5. Tucker, D.M.; Luu, P . Adaptive control of functional connectivity: Dorsal and ventral limbic divisions regulate the dorsal and
ventral neocortical networks. Cereb. Cortex2023, 33, 7870–7895. [CrossRef]
6. Luu, P .; Tucker, D.M. Continuity and change in neural plasticity through embryonic morphogenesis, fetal activity-dependent
synaptogenesis, and infant memory consolidation. Dev. Psychobiol.2023, 65, e22439. [CrossRef]
7. Markov, N.T.; Misery, P .; Falchier, A.; Lamy, C.; Vezoli, J.; Quilodran, R.; Gariel, M.A.; Giroud, P .; Ercsey-Ravasz, M.; Pilaz, L.J.;
et al. Weight consistency specifies regularities of macaque cortical networks. Cereb. Cortex2011, 21, 1254–1272. [CrossRef]
8. Vezoli, J.; Magrou, L.; Goebel, R.; Wang, X.-J.; Knoblauch, K.; Vinck, M.; Kennedy, H. Cortical hierarchy, dual counterstream
architecture and the importance of top-down generative networks. NeuroImage 2020, 225, 117479. [CrossRef]
9. Aparicio-Rodríguez, G.; García-Cabezas, M. Comparison of the predictive power of two models of cortico-cortical connections in
primates: The distance rule model and the structural model. Cereb. Cortex2023, 33, 8131–8149. [CrossRef]
10. Campbell, K. Cortical neuron specification: It has its time and place. Neuron 2005, 46, 373–376. [CrossRef]
11. Muir, D.R.; Da Costa, N.M.A.; Girardin, C.C.; Naaman, S.; Omer, D.B.; Ruesch, E.; Grinvald, A.; Douglas, R.J. Embedding of
cortical representations by the superficial patch system. Cereb. Cortex2011, 21, 2244–2260. [CrossRef]
12. Muir, D.R.; Douglas, R.J. From neural arbors to daisies. Cereb. Cortex2010, 21, 1118–1133. [CrossRef]
13. Martin, K.A.C.; Roth, S.; Rusch, E.S. Superficial layer pyramidal cells communicate heterogeneously between multiple functional
domains of cat primary visual cortex. Nat. Commun.2014, 5, 55252. [CrossRef]
14. Molnar, Z. Cortical columns. In Comprehensive Developmental Neuroscience: Neural Circuit Development and Function in the Brain;
Rubenstein, J.L.R., Rakic, P ., Eds.; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2013; Volume 3, pp. 109–129. [CrossRef]
15. Bosking, W.H.; Zhang, Y.; Schofield, B.; Fitzpatrick, D. Orientation selectivity and the arrangement of horizontal connections in
tree shrew striate cortex. J. Neurosci.1997, 17, 2112–2127. [CrossRef]
16. Rockland, K.S.; Lund, J.S. Intrinsic laminar lattice connections in primate visual cortex. J. Comp. Neurol.1983, 216, 303–318.
[CrossRef]
17. Issa, N.P .; Trepel, C.; Stryker, M.P . Spatial frequency maps in cat visual cortex. J. Neurosci.2000, 20, 8504–8514. [CrossRef]
18. Girman, S.V .; Sauvé, Y.; Lund, R.D. Receptive field properties of single neurons in rat primary visual cortex. J. Neurophysiol.1999,
82, 301–311. [CrossRef]
19. Wiesel, T.N.; Hubel, D.H. Ordered arrangement of orientation columns in monkeys lacking visual experience.J. Comp. Neurol.
1974, 158, 307–318. [CrossRef]
20. Blakemore, C.; Van Sluyters, R.C. Reversal of the physiological effects of monocular deprivation in kittens: Further evidence for a
sensitive period. J. Physiol.1974, 237, 195–216. [CrossRef]
21. Obermayer, K.; Blasdel, G. Geometry of orientation and ocular dominance columns in monkey striate cortex. J. Neurosci.1993, 13,
4114–4129. [CrossRef]
22. Takahata, T.; Miyashita, M.; Tanaka, S.; Kaas, J.H. Identification of ocular dominance domains in new world owl monkeys by
immediate-early gene expression. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA2014, 111, 4297–4302. [CrossRef]
23. Horton, J.C.; Adams, D.L. The cortical column: A structure without a function. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci.2005, 360, 837–862.
[CrossRef]
24. Friston, K. Functional integration and inference in the brain. Prog. Neurobiol.2002, 68, 113–143. [CrossRef]
25. Friston, K.; Friston, K. A theory of cortical responses. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci.2005, 360, 815–836. [CrossRef]
26. Friston, K.; Friston, K. The free-energy principle: A unified brain theory? Nat. Rev. Neurosci.2010, 11, 127–138. [CrossRef]
27. Friston, K. Is the free-energy principle neurocentric? Nat. Rev. Neurosci.2010, 11, 605. [CrossRef]
28. Friston, K. Maps and territories, smoke, and mirrors. Behav. Brain Sci.2022, 45, e195. [CrossRef]
29. Friston, K.; Ao, P . Free Energy, Value, and Attractors. Comput. Math. Methods Med.2012, 2012, 937860. [CrossRef]
30. Friston, K.; Levin, M.; Sengupta, B.; Pezzulo, G. Knowing one’s place: A free-energy approach to pattern regulation. J. R. Soc.
Interface 2015, 12, 20141383. [CrossRef]
31. Friston, K.; Thornton, C.; Clark, A. Free-energy minimization and the dark-room problem. Front. Psychol.2012, 3, 130. [CrossRef]
32. Friston, K.J.; Parr, T.; Yufik, Y.; Sajid, N.; Price, C.J.; Holmes, E. Generative models, linguistic communication and active inference.
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.2020, 118, 42–64. [CrossRef]
33. Buckley, C.L.; Kim, C.S.; McGregor, S.; Seth, A.K. The free energy principle for action and perception: A mathematical review.J.
Math. Psychol.2017, 81, 55–79. [CrossRef]
34. Constant, A. The free energy principle: It’s not about what it takes, it’s about what took you there. Biol. Philos. 2021, 36, 10.
[CrossRef]
Entropy 2024, 26, 287 17 of 17
35. Ramstead, M.J.D.; Sakthivadivel, D.A.R.; Heins, C.; Koudahl, M.; Millidge, B.; Da Costa, L.; Klein, B.; Friston, K.J. On Bayesian
Mechanics: A Physics of and by Beliefs. Interface Focus2022, 13, 20220029. [CrossRef]
36. Beim Graben, P .; Pinotsis, D.; Saddy, D.; Potthas, R. Language processing by dynamic fields. Cogn. Neurodyn. 2008, 2, 79–88.
[CrossRef]
37. Kirchhoff, M.; Parr, T.; Palacios, E.; Friston, K.; Kiverstein, J.; Michael, K.; Thomas, P .; Ensor, P .; Karl, F.; Julian, K.; et al. The
Markov blankets of life: Autonomy, active inference and the free energy principle.J. R. Soc. Interface2018, 15, 20170792. [CrossRef]
38. Luu, P .; Tucker, D.M.; Friston, K. From active affordance to active inference: Vertical integration of cognition in the cerebral cortex
through dual subcortical control systems. Cereb. Cortex2023, 34, bhad458. [CrossRef]
39. Bastos, A.M.; Usrey, W.M.; Adams, R.A.; Mangun, G.R.; Fries, P .; Friston, K.J. Canonical microcircuits for predictive coding.
Neuron 2012, 76, 695–711. [CrossRef]
40. Vergara, R.C.; Jaramillo-Riveri, S.; Luarte, A.; Moënne-Loccoz, C.; Fuentes, R.; Couve, A.; Maldonado, P .E. The energy homeostasis
principle: Neuronal energy regulation drives local network dynamics generating behavior. Front. Comput. Neurosci.2019, 13, 49.
[CrossRef]
41. Perin, R.; Berger, T.K.; Markram, H. A synaptic organizing principle for cortical neuronal groups. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA2011,
108, 5419–5424. [CrossRef]
42. Song, S.; Sjöström, P .J.; Reigl, M.; Nelson, S.; Chklovskii, D.B. Correction: Highly nonrandom features of synaptic connectivity in
local cortical circuits. PLoS Biol.2005, 3, e350. [CrossRef]
43. Izhikevich, E.M.; Desai, N.S. Relating STDP to BCM. Neural Comput.2003, 15, 1511–1523. [CrossRef]
44. Keck, T.; Toyoizumi, T.; Chen, L.; Doiron, B.; Feldman, D.E.; Fox, K.; Gerstner, W.; Haydon, P .G.; Hübener, M.; Lee, H.-K.; et al.
Integrating Hebbian and homeostatic plasticity: The current state of the field and future research directions. Philos. Trans. R. Soc.
B Biol. Sci.2017, 372, 20160158. [CrossRef]
45. Chapman, C.L.; Wright, J.J.; Bourke, P .D. Spatial eigenmodes and synchronous oscillation: Co-incidence detection in simulated
cerebral cortex. J. Math. Biol.2002, 45, 57–78. [CrossRef]
46. Downes, J.H.; Hammond, M.W.; Xydas, D.; Spencer, M.C.; Becerra, V .M.; Warwick, K.; Whalley, B.J.; Nasuto, S.J. Emergence of a
small-world functional network in cultured neurons. PLoS Comput. Biol.2012, 8, e1002522. [CrossRef]
47. Hollville, E.; Romero, S.E.; Deshmukh, M. Apoptotic cell death regulation in neurons. FEBS J.2019, 286, 3276–3298. [CrossRef]
48. Heck, N.; Golbs, A.; Riedemann, T.; Sun, J.-J.; Lessmann, V .; Luhmann, H.J. Activity-dependent regulation of neuronal apoptosis
in neonatal mouse cerebral cortex. Cereb. Cortex2007, 18, 1335–1349. [CrossRef]
49. Sang, I.E.W.F.; Schroer, J.; Halbhuber, L.; Warm, D.; Yang, J.-W.; Luhmann, H.J.; Kilb, W.; Sinning, A. Optogenetically controlled
activity pattern determines survival rate of developing neocortical neurons. Int. J. Mol. Sci.2021, 22, 6575. [CrossRef]
50. Bassett, D.S.; Bullmore, E. Small-world brain networks. Neurosci. 2006, 12, 512–523. [CrossRef]
51. Wright, J.J.; Bourke, P .D. Further Work on the shaping of cortical development and function by synchrony and metabolic
competition. Front. Comput. Neurosci.2016, 10, 127. [CrossRef]
52. Cohen, R.; Havlin, S. Scale-free networks are ultrasmall. Phys. Rev. Lett.2003, 90, 058701. [CrossRef]
53. Wright, J.J.; Bourke, P .D. On the dynamics of cortical development: Synchrony and synaptic self-organization.Front. Comput.
Neurosci. 2003, 7, 4. [CrossRef]
54. Basole, A.; White, L.E.; Fitzpatrick, D. Mapping multiple features in the population response of visual cortex. Nature 2003, 423,
986–990. [CrossRef]
55. Sereno, M.I.; Dale, A.M.; Reppas, J.B.; Kwong, K.K.; Belliveau, J.W.; Brady, T.J.; Rosen, B.R.; Tootell, R.B.H. Borders of multiple
visual areas in humans revealed by functional magnetic resonance imaging. Science 1995, 268, 889–893. [CrossRef]
56. Konkle, T. Emergent organization of multiple visuotopic maps without a feature hierarchy. bioRxiv 2021. [CrossRef]
57. Espinosa, J.S.; Stryker, M.P . Development and plasticity of the primary visual cortex. Neuron 2012, 75, 230–249. [CrossRef]
58. Wright, J.J.; Bourke, P .D. Unification of free energy minimization, spatiotemporal energy, and dimension reduction models of V1
organization: Postnatal learning on an antenatal scaffold. Front. Comput. Neurosci.2022, 16, 869268. [CrossRef]
59. Sheth, B.R.; Young, R. Two visual pathways in primates based on sampling of space: Exploitation and exploration of visual
information. Front. Integr. Neurosci.2016, 10, 37. [CrossRef]
60. Issa, N.P .; Rosenberg, A.; Husson, T.R. Models and measurements of functional maps in V1.J. Neurophysiol.2008, 99, 2745–2754.
[CrossRef]
61. Baker, C.L. Spatial- and temporal-frequency selectivity as a basis for velocity preference in cat striate cortex neurons.Vis. Neurosci.
1990, 4, 101–113. [CrossRef]
62. Wright, J.J.; Bourke, P .D. The mesoanatomy of the cortex, minimization of free energy, and generative cognition.Front. Comput.
Neurosci. 2023, 17, 1169772. [CrossRef]
63. Liljenström, H. Modelling the dynamics of olfactory cortex using simplified network units and realistic architecture. Int. J. Neural
Syst. 1991, 2, 1–15. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.